Cough is one of the most common symptoms for which 
people present to primary care and is a chief complaint 
for patients seeking medical attention in respiratory or 
allergy specialist clinics1,2. The definition of chronic 
cough in clinical guidelines is cough persisting for 
>8 weeks in adults and >4 weeks in children3–5; how-
ever, in many epidemiological studies, chronic cough is 
defined as cough that lasts >3 months6. The definition of 
chronic cough is guided by expert opinion, as definitive 
clinical criteria to distinguish acute cough from chronic 
cough are lacking.
In practice, chronic cough is often a long-​lasting 
and burdensome condition, persisting for several 
years and sometimes decades for a substantial number 
of patients, despite exhaustive medical intervention7–9. 
Many pulmonary and some extrapulmonary diseases 
and disorders can present with chronic cough, making 
diagnosis and treatment challenging. Moreover, 40% of 
adults with chronic cough referred for specialist evalu-
ation have no identified cause (known as unexplained 
chronic cough) or have persistent cough despite optimal 
treatment of conditions associated with chronic cough 
(known as refractory chronic cough)10.
Chronic cough of any aetiology in adults is widely 
believed to reflect a hypersensitivity condition, char-
acterized by coughing that is often triggered by low 
levels of thermal, mechanical or chemical exposure11. 
The considerable burden of persistent chronic cough 
has led to an appreciation of cough hypersensitivity as 
a distinct clinical entity in adults. Distinct mechanisms 
that involve both peripheral and central neural path-
ways have a role in this hypersensitivity, and have moti-
vated advances in cough suppressant (antitussive) drug 
discovery12. The aetiology and management of chronic 
cough differs in children from that in adults, and the 
relevance of cough hypersensitivity as an underpinning 
mechanism in children remains unclear.
This Primer discusses the global prevalence and 
mechanisms of cough, with a focus on the most common 
causes of cough hypersensitivity. This Primer provides 
an overview of the current state-​of-​the-​art recommenda-
tions for cough diagnosis and management, and presents 
a viewpoint of recent advances in cough hypersensitivity 
and chronic cough that may have a future effect on 
treatment.
Epidemiology
Chronic cough affects ~10% of adults in various gen-
eral populations13. The prevalence of chronic cough 
is higher in Europe, America and Australia (10–20%) 
than in Asia (<5%)13 (Fig. 1). In the general population 
of Copenhagen, Denmark, the prevalence of chronic 
Cough hypersensitivity and  
chronic cough
Kian Fan Chung   1,2, Lorcan McGarvey3, Woo-​Jung Song   4, Anne B. Chang   5,6, 
Kefang Lai7, Brendan J. Canning8, Surinder S. Birring9, Jaclyn A. Smith10 and 
Stuart B. Mazzone   11 ✉
Abstract | Chronic cough is globally prevalent across all age groups. This disorder is challenging  
to treat because many pulmonary and extrapulmonary conditions can present with chronic 
cough, and cough can also be present without any identifiable underlying cause or be refractory 
to therapies that improve associated conditions. Most patients with chronic cough have cough 
hypersensitivity, which is characterized by increased neural responsivity to a range of stimuli that 
affect the airways and lungs, and other tissues innervated by common nerve supplies. Cough 
hypersensitivity presents as excessive coughing often in response to relatively innocuous stimuli, 
causing significant psychophysical morbidity and affecting patients’ quality of life. Understanding 
of the mechanisms that contribute to cough hypersensitivity and excessive coughing in different 
patient populations and across the lifespan is advancing and has contributed to the development 
of new therapies for chronic cough in adults. Owing to differences in the pathology, the organs 
involved and individual patient factors, treatment of chronic cough is progressing towards a 
personalized approach, and, in the future, novel ways to endotype patients with cough may prove 
valuable in management.
✉e-​mail: stuart.mazzone@
unimelb.edu.au
https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41572-022-00370-​w
	
 1
PRIMER
NATURE REVIEWS | DiSEASE PRimERS | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 
0123456789();: 
cough was 4% overall, with a prevalence of 3% in 
never-​smokers, 4% in former smokers and 8% in current 
smokers14. Moreover, the prevalence of chronic cough in 
a meta-​analysis was 6.2% in adults in China15.
The incidence of chronic cough ranges from 1.2 to 
5.7 per 100 person-​years in population-​based studies 
of adults ≥45 years of age in Belgium and Canada16,17. 
However, no global or continental-​level data are availa-
ble. The longitudinal epidemiology of chronic cough and 
cough hypersensitivity is largely unknown, but cough 
may persist for longer than 5 years despite treatment 
in adults with chronic cough8,9,18. Certain patient traits, 
such as comorbid obesity, gastro-​oesophageal reflux 
disease (GERD) and genetic background are associ-
ated with longer disease duration but warrant further 
investigation9,18.
The prevalence of chronic cough in children is not as 
clearly defined as in adults. Overall, prevalence of chronic 
cough in children ranges from 1.1% to 21.9%19,20; the 
difference in these estimates is likely due to differences 
in the method of data collection, definition of chronic 
cough used, setting studied (such as high-​income ver-
sus low-​income country) and age of children studied 
(Table 1). Few data are available on the incidence of 
chronic cough following an acute respiratory infection; 
one study21 reported that 171 of the 839 children (20.4%, 
95% CI 17.7–23.1) recruited from the emergency depart-
ment of a specialist children’s hospital had chronic cough 
(defined as cough for >4 weeks) but 63 of these children 
already had chronic cough at presentation. Thus, the 
incidence is likely 108 of 839 (12.9%). Of the children 
with chronic cough who were reviewed by paediatric pul-
monologists, 30.8% had a new and serious chronic lung 
disease and 47.0% had protracted bacterial bronchitis21.
Risk factors
Various environmental and host factors, such as respira-
tory infection, air pollutants, occupational irritants, aller-
gens, eosinophils or refluxate, can sensitize and trigger 
cough and are potential risk factors for chronic cough22,23. 
Biological traits, such as age or sex hormonal status, 
also interact with these triggers in developing chronic 
cough24–26. However, the definition of chronic cough used 
in population-​based studies is based on cough duration, 
does not differentiate protective cough responses from 
hypersensitivity and does not represent the key nature 
that defines cough as the disease, such as the impact, 
severity and hypersensitivity, and thus the epide­
mio­logical research definition should be refined for 
elucidating the risk factors6,27–29.
Patient factors. Age and sex underlie the burden and 
prevalence of chronic cough, although the mechanisms 
that underlie this association are unknown. In one sur-
vey, two-​thirds of the patients presenting with chronic 
cough to specialist clinics were female, and the most 
common decade for presentation was 60–69 years24. The 
high proportion of women in specialist clinics may be 
due to greater effects of cough in older women, as they 
have more frequent complications such as stress urinary 
incontinence30. Another possible explanation for the 
increased prevalence of chronic cough in female adults 
is that women have a more sensitive cough reflex than 
men, as demonstrated by inhalation capsaicin cough 
reflex sensitivity tests25 or that women have greater acti-
vation of the somatosensory brain cortex in response to 
capsaicin inhalation than men24.
Notably, sex differences in capsaicin cough reflex 
sensitivity are not observed during prepubertal ages26,31, 
suggesting that mechanisms that predispose to hyper-
sensitivity do not occur in children. In support of this, 
the prevalence of Arnold’s nerve cough reflex (evoked 
by mechanical stimulation of vagal fibres innervating the 
external auditory canal) is 11-​fold higher in adults with 
chronic cough than in healthy adults and those with res-
piratory disease without cough, indicative of vagal hyper-
sensitivity, whereas prevalence of this reflex is similar in 
children with chronic cough and in healthy children32.
Other populations can have unique cough epidemi-
ology. For example, in China, most patients with chronic 
cough are ~40 years of age, with an equal sex proportion, 
despite the enhanced cough sensitivity in women24,33.
Relatively few studies have identified specific genetic 
risk factors for chronic cough. Identified genetic risk fac­
tors include mutations in TRPV1 (encodes transient recep-
tor potential cation channel subfamily V member 1)34  
and TAC2R (encodes neurokinin 2 receptor)35 and 
a RFC1 (encodes replication factor complex subunit 1) 
expansion associated with sensory neuropathy36,37.
Clinical factors. Cigarette smokers are three times more 
likely to report chronic cough than never-​smokers and 
ex-​smokers, and the cough is usually due to chronic 
bronchitis38. However, most patients in cough specialist 
clinic are non-​smokers.
Infection with respiratory viruses (such as rhino­
virus or severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 
2 (SARS-​CoV-2)) is a common cause of acute cough and 
is usually self-​limiting, but post-​infectious cough may 
persist for months in some individuals. For example, 
10–20% of patients after SARS-​CoV-2 infection39 and 
Author addresses
1Experimental Studies Unit, National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College London, 
London, UK.
2Department of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Brompton and Harefield Hospital, London, UK.
3Wellcome-​Wolfson Institute for Experimental Medicine, School of Medicine, Dentistry 
and Biomedical Sciences, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, UK.
4Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 
Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
5Australian Centre for Health Services Innovation, Queensland’s University of Technology 
and Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Queensland Children’s Hospital, 
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
6Division of Child Health, Menzies School of Health Research, Darwin, Northern Territory, 
Australia.
7The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, National Center of 
Respiratory Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Disease, State 
Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, 
Guangzhou, China.
8Johns Hopkins Asthma and Allergy Center, Baltimore, MD, USA.
9Centre for Human & Applied Physiological Sciences, School of Basic & Medical 
Biosciences, Faculty of Life Sciences & Medicine, King’s College London, London, UK.
10Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
11Department of Anatomy and Physiology, University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
2 | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 	
www.nature.com/nrdp
Primer
0123456789();: 
8.5–43% of patients after H1N1 influenza40,41 have per-
sistent cough, which may be related to cough hypersensi-
tivity. The viruses that are likely to induce post-​infectious 
cough are unclear. Infection with Bordetella pertussis 
may also be associated with a prolonged and debilitat-
ing cough (whooping cough), which can be difficult to 
treat42,43.
Common pulmonary causes of chronic cough in 
non-​smokers with normal chest X-​rays and spiro­
metry are corticosteroid-​responsive cough such as 
eosinophilic conditions, including cough variant 
asthma, non-​asthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis and 
atopic cough44,45. Extrapulmonary conditions are 
also commonly associated with cough, including 
GERD and upper airway cough syndrome (previously 
called ‘post-​nasal drip syndrome’) due to rhinitis or 
rhinosinusitis22. Indeed, cough variant asthma, eosin-
ophilic bronchitis, upper airway cough syndrome and 
GERD account for 51–92% of cases of adult chronic 
cough globally45,46. However, the existence of upper 
airway cough syndrome as a distinct clinical entity has 
been debated and is proposed to reflect generalized 
airway inflammation resulting from asthma or airway 
reflux4, potentially underestimating the true incidence 
of cough in these conditions. Of note, the proportion of 
patients with chronic cough with GERD is lower in 
East Asia than in Europe and the USA45,46. Chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), bronchiecta-
sis, lung cancer, interstitial lung disease and obstructive 
sleep apnoea are also associated with chronic cough and 
cough hypersensitivity but chest radiology and/or lung 
physiology measurements are usually abnormal47–52. 
Chronic cough is widely recognized as an adverse effect 
of angiotensin-​converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, 
which are prescribed as anti-​hypertensives or for heart 
failure53.
Rare causes of chronic cough in adults account for 
<15% of cases and commonly include protracted bac-
terial bronchitis, somatic cough syndrome (which is 
more common in children), diffuse panbronchiolitis 
and obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome54. However, 
only limited high-​quality evidence is available regard-
ing their prevalence and clinical implications in adults 
with chronic cough. Less common extrapulmonary 
conditions include atypical cardiac failure and cardiac 
arrhythmias and tracheobronchomalacia (Table 2).
Environmental factors. Occupational irritants such as 
fumes, gases, cleaning products or dust55 may cause 
cough, either by triggering cough reflex or by induc-
ing oxidative stress and eosinophilic inflammation56–58. 
However, the precise effect of environmental factors 
on chronic cough remains elusive. Air pollution is an 
important risk factor for chronic cough particularly 
in East Asia where air pollution levels are high15,59,60. 
At the population level, the annual level of fine par-
ticulate matter with a diameter of ≤2.5 μm (known as 
PM2.5) is higher in Asian countries than in European or 
North American countries, but the prevalence of chronic 
cough is lower61. Data from within-​population studies 
suggest that the degree of air pollution is associated with 
the incidence of chronic cough or bronchitis62,63, high-
lighting potential host–environmental interactions in 
developing chronic cough.
Prevalence of chronic cough 
in adult populations (%)
 
0–5
 
5–10
 
10–15
 
15–20
 
>20
 
Data not available
Fig. 1 | Global prevalence of chronic cough. Map showing the results of a meta-​analysis of 90 published studies assessing 
the regional pooled prevalence of chronic cough in adult populations. Reprinted with permission from ref.13, ERS.
	
 3
NATURE REVIEWS | DiSEASE PRimERS | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 
Primer
0123456789();: 
Mechanisms/pathophysiology
The sensorimotor phenomenology of cough (Box 1) sug-
gests the involvement of a complex suite of neurobiologi-
cal processes involving the peripheral nervous system, 
brainstem and higher brain in this phenomenon. Cough 
can be a reflex or can be under volitional and cognitive 
control. It is typically initiated by irritant stimuli that 
activate airway mucosal sensory nerve fibres. These 
fibres convey this information to brainstem circuitry, 
which alters the normal breathing cycle to a cough motor 
pattern. Volitional and cognitively controlled cough is 
often accompanied by an irritant sensation known as the 
urge to cough. Volitional and cognitive control of cough 
and the perception of an urge to cough involve neural 
processing in subcortical and cortical brain sites.
Studying cough and cough hypersensitivity
Human neurophysiological studies have contributed to 
our understanding of cough and cough hypersensitivity, 
but they are limited by the types of measurements and 
interventions possible. Detailed mechanistic studies into 
cough neurophysiology have, therefore, relied heavily 
on laboratory animals, especially guinea pigs and cats. 
Cough in these species can be reliably induced with 
stimuli that also evoke cough in humans64, and, as such, 
studies in these models have identified mechanisms that 
lead to sensory nerve activation, normal cough induc-
tion and neural pathways that mediate reflex coughing65. 
However, the use of animals to model the development 
and maintenance of cough hypersensitivity in humans 
has been debated64 as animals used to study pathological 
cough are largely devoid of any spontaneous coughing, 
requiring cough induction with an inhaled stimulus to 
assess the hypersensitivity. Moreover, although reflex 
cough hypersensitivity can be demonstrated in animal 
models, therapies that reverse this hypersensitivity have 
mostly not been clinically effective in humans12.
Peripheral neurophysiology
In guinea pigs, two peripheral sensory fibre subtypes 
can initiate cough when stimulated: thinly myeli-
nated Aδ-​fibre subtype and nociceptive unmyelinated 
C-​fibre subtype65–68 (Fig. 2). The cell bodies of cough Aδ 
fibres and C fibres arise from distinct vagal ganglia65,66 
(nodose ganglion for Aδ fibres and jugular ganglion 
for C fibres), and their peripheral terminations are 
Table 1 | Prevalence of chronic cough in children
Setting
Chronic cough definition
Age, years (n)
Prevalence, %
Ref.
Cross-​sectional survey of Seattle middle 
school students using written and video 
respiratory-​symptom questionnaires
Chronic productive cough: “daily cough 
productive of phlegm for at least 3 months out  
of the year”
11–15 (2,397)
7.2 (all), 3.4 (excluding 
those with asthma)
220
Two groups of children: one enrolled from 
public schools within a 10 km radius of Royal 
Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Australia, and 
another enrolled from six schools in Nigeria; 
both questionnaire based
“In the last 12 months has your child had a cough 
that lasted more than 3 weeks and was not 
associated with a cold or flu?”
5–7 (511)
10.4
221
8–11 (654)
9.6
8–11 (566)
5.1
Suva City schoolchildren, Fiji; questionnaire 
based
“Has this child coughed mucus on most mornings 
in the last 12 months”
Mean 9.6 (2,173)
21.9
20
12 centres in northern, central and southern 
Italy; self-​administered questionnaires 
completed by parents
Cough or phlegm for ≥4 days a week (in the 
absence of a cold) for ≥1 month per year
6–7 (20,016); 
13–14 (13,616)
6.8
222
Whole-​population prospective study 
undertaken in four remote communities  
in north Western Australia
Parent-​reported daily wet cough for ≥4 weeks 
with clinician researcher confirmation (with 
physiotherapist using non-​invasive techniques  
to elicit a cough if necessary)
Median 3.5 (203)
13
223
18 districts of six cities in Liaoning province, 
China; Chinese language translation of the 
Epidemiologic Standardization Project 
Questionnaire of American Thoracic Society; 
self-​completed by parents
Cough on most days (>4 days per week) for as 
long as 3 months per year, either together with  
or separately from colds
3–12 (11,860)
9.5 (persistent cough)
60
Seemed congested or brought up phlegm or 
mucus from the chest on most days (>4 days per 
week) for as long as 3 months per year, either 
together with or separately from colds
4.6 (persistent phlegm)
Children who participated in CAPS and 
BOLD-​Chikhwawa studies, Chikhwawa 
District, rural Malawi; electronic questionnaire 
in Chichewa, the local language
“Does your child usually have a cough when they 
don’t have a cold?” and “Are there months in 
which they cough on most days?”
Mean 7.1 (804)
8
224
Five villages in Dehlon Block of Ludhiana, 
Punjab, India
Cough lasting for >3 weeks
1–15 (2,275)
1.1
19
Follow-​up of a birth cohort in which parents 
completed questionnaires or survey in various 
years
Score of ≥3 to question “How often has this child 
been bothered by cough?” at least 2–3 episodes 
in the past year
Mean 1.1 (1,064)
6.7
225
Mean 2.1 (945)
4.5
Mean 5.8 (1,024)
12.2
Mean 8.1 (841)
12.1
Mean 10.4 (956)
12.4
4 | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 	
www.nature.com/nrdp
Primer
0123456789();: 
believed to reside predominantly in the major airways 
(larynx, trachea and large bronchi)65, although termi-
nations in the lung parenchyma cannot be discounted, 
as several parenchymal lung diseases present with 
chronic cough51. Molecular analyses show differing 
patterns of gene expression and novel mechanisms of 
regulation69,70. Aδ-​fibre-​mediated cough is triggered 
by aspirated particulates, accumulated secretions and 
Table 2 | Additional conditions associated with chronic cough in adults and children
Condition
Possible mechanism
Clinical picture
Obstructive sleep 
apnoea
Airway inflammation associated with 
excessive snoring, GERD, increased 
cough reflex sensitivity (cough 
hypersensitivity) and tracheobron-
chomalacia, a condition in which the 
walls of the trachea and bronchi are 
weak, leading to dilation and easy 
collapsibility of the airways
Presence of nocturnal cough, snoring and nocturnal heartburn. Raised BMI 
and excessive daytime somnolence in older children or adults. Behavioural 
issues, tonsillar adenohypertrophy and facial abnormality in young children. 
Prevalence range 33–68% in patients with confirmed obstructive sleep 
apnoea52. CPAP therapy may be effective in alleviating cough52
Ear diseases or 
obstructions, including 
excessive wax or foreign 
body
Activation of Arnold’s nerve cough 
reflex and vagal neuropathy
Cough is triggered by mechanical stimulation of the external auditory meatus. 
This occurs in 2% of the adult population but in 25% of people with chronic 
cough32. Can occasionally be identified as a cause of chronic cough when 
mechanical stimulation of the external auditory meatus is accompanied by 
features of cough hypersensitivity such as throat irritation and allotussia226
‘Cardiac cough’: 
premature ventricular 
contractions, cardiac 
arrhythmias and heart 
failure
Haemodynamic changes in the 
pulmonary circulation, activation of 
cardiopulmonary C fibres or effect  
of pulmonary oedema
Ventricular arrhythmia-​induced cough and of cough syncope may be present 
in 5% of cases of ventricular arrhythmia227. Nocturnal cough can be a symptom 
of patients with cardiac failure and could represent the effect of airway 
oedema on cough receptors in large airways or the pressure of enlarged left 
atrium on cough receptors in airways
Peripheral sensory 
neuropathy with or 
without ataxia
Genetic mutations and/or nerve 
pathology leading to altered sensory 
neuron function
A rare autosomal dominant hereditary sensory neuropathy associated with 
chronic cough, cough hypersensitivity and gastro-​oesophageal reflux228
Tracheobronchomalacia 
or expiratory central 
airway collapse
Possible problems clearing airway 
secretions or changes in mechanical 
properties of the trachea during 
breathing
An excessive dynamic airway collapse of the posterior membrane presenting 
with a seal-​like barking cough caused by excessive vibration of posterior 
tracheal wall. This condition can mimic or coexist with asthma, COPD and 
bronchiectasis. This condition is often associated with poor airway clearance  
of secretions
Diffuse panbronchiolitis
Airway and lung inflammation
Chronic cough may be the sole or predominant symptom. Patients can have 
normal respiratory function or mild airflow limitation, normal chest X-​ray 
findings and mild dilation of the bronchiolar passages and a ‘tree-​in-​bud’ 
pattern on chest high-​resolution CT. Cough can improve with long-​term 
macrolide antibiotic therapy in some patients
Lung and airway 
tumours
Lung cancer causes of cough include 
the direct effect of tumour mass leading 
to obstruction, collapse of lung or 
pleural or pericardial effusion, treatment 
of cancer with thoracic irradiation and 
chemo- and/or immunotherapy229
A change in cough pattern in a smoker can indicate lung cancer
ILDs including 
interstitial pulmonary 
fibrosis and systemic 
sclerosis-​associated ILD
Airway and lung inflammation or 
activation of cough receptors in fibrosis 
by neuroinflammatory factors
Cough and dyspnoea are the main presenting features with, often, chronic 
cough being the main distressing symptom. Other causes of chronic cough 
need to be excluded such as GERD, obstructive sleep apnoea, emphysema, 
lung cancer and asthma. Often accompanied by features of cough 
hypersensitivity with an increase in capsaicin cough sensitivity
Somatic cough 
syndrome (psychogenic 
cough) and tic cough 
(habit cough)
Tic or habit cough in children (rare 
in adults) is possibly anxiety related, 
whereas somatic cough syndrome could 
be caused by psychological–functional 
disorder (transfer of psychological 
distress into a physical symptom)
Tic cough is a single repetitive cough, of maybe barking/honking character, 
usually absent in sleep. DSM-5 diagnostic criteria must be met for a diagnosis 
of somatic cough syndrome: “disruption of daily life; excessive thoughts about 
the seriousness of the symptoms, persistent anxiety about health or symptoms, 
or excessive time and energy devoted to symptoms or health concerns; and 
persistence of symptoms (typically more than six months)”109
Parasitosis
Airway and lung eosinophilic 
inflammation and mechanical 
stimulation
Parasitosis such as paragonimiasis, caused by a lung fluke, Paragonimus 
westermani, which infects the lungs after eating an infected raw or undercooked 
crab or crayfish, or mammomonogamosis, caused by Mammomonogamus 
laryngeus, which inhabits the upper respiratory region in the human trachea, 
bronchi or larynx, is a rare but relevant cause in some tropical regions or in 
travellers. These disorders can often present as a dry persistent cough with 
normal chest X-​rays. Blood eosinophilia is frequent230,231
Hypereosinophilic 
syndrome
Airway eosinophilic inflammation with 
or without FIP1L1–PDGFRA fusion gene 
and aberrant tyrosine kinase activity
Presents with chronic cough as the sole or predominant symptom, 
hypereosinophilia in blood and sputum, and responds well to imatinib118.
COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CPAP, continuous positive airway pressure; DSM-5, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition; 
GERD, gastro-​oesophageal reflux disease; ILD, interstitial lung disease.
	
 5
NATURE REVIEWS | DiSEASE PRimERS | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 
Primer
0123456789();: 
mucosal acidification66, as might happen after aspiration 
of gastric contents. Conversely, C-​fibre-​mediated cough 
is triggered by a range of irritant environmental chemi-
cals and mediators of inflammation or tissue damage65. 
Cough challenge studies and histochemical staining 
of airway biopsy samples suggest that these two cough 
pathways also exist in humans64,68,71. A combination of 
animal and human studies has provided a comprehen-
sive understanding of the functioning of ion channels 
and receptors responsible for excitation of cough sensory 
fibres12 (Fig. 2).
Central neurophysiology
In mammals, many vagal sensory neurons terminate in 
the nucleus of the solitary tract, an important sensory 
processing nucleus in the medulla oblongata65 (Fig. 2). 
Studies in guinea pigs suggest that the regions involved 
in integrating signals from cough sensory neurons have 
little overlap with other vagal neuronal subtypes that 
innervate the airways and lungs65,72. The paratrigeminal 
nucleus also receives inputs from vagal cough sensory 
neurons73. Different subtypes of vagal sensory neu-
ron terminate in the nucleus of the solitary tract and 
the paratrigeminal nucleus, and neurons from these 
brain regions have differing output connectivity65,72,74,75. 
In guinea pigs, cough mediated by jugular C fibres 
is reduced by targeted lesioning of the paratrigem-
inal nucleus, whereas Aδ-​fibre-​mediated cough is 
unaffected75. Although precision mapping of sensory 
terminations in the human brainstem is not feasible, 
functional brain imaging studies using stimuli that dif-
ferentially activate nodose and jugular neural pathways 
support the conservation of this wiring in humans71.
Glutamate (mediated by post-​synaptic NMDA 
(N-​methyl-​d-​aspartate) receptors)76,77 and, possibly, 
neurokinin (NK) receptors67,75,78 are involved in cough in 
guinea pigs. Indeed, NMDA and NK1 receptor blockade 
in animals and humans has antitussive actions, support-
ing a role for these receptors in cough79,80. In rodents, 
brainstem neurons receiving cough sensory inputs 
are involved in autonomic, limbic and somatosensory 
processing73 (Fig. 2). In humans, functional brain imag-
ing studies have found widely distributed brain activity 
accompanying inhalation of cough-​evoking stimuli, 
in primary and secondary sensory cortical areas, and in 
the cingulate, insula and orbitofrontal cortices. This 
activity likely reflects the diverse autonomic responses, 
and the affective, hedonic and discriminative sensory 
experiences that accompany cough81.
Peripheral sensitization of cough
Experimental induction of lung inflammation, for exam-
ple, with allergens or respiratory viruses, in animals and 
in several airway diseases or treatments in humans, 
is accompanied by alterations in the excitability of the 
peripheral terminals of vagal sensory fibres that regulate 
cough65 (Fig. 3). For example, impaired metabolism of 
bradykinin, a potent activator of vagal C fibres is linked to 
coughing in patients using ACE inhibitor antihyperten-
sive therapy82. Similarly, excess release and/or impaired 
metabolism of ATP is associated with refractory chronic 
cough12.
Inflammation can also cause plasticity of airway 
mucosal innervation, including changes in receptors, ion 
channels, neurochemistry, fibre density or the cells that 
contribute to fibre excitation65,83,84. For example, patients 
with chronic cough had a ~30-​fold increase in cough 
responsiveness to inhaled capsaicin that was accom-
panied by an increased density of TRPV1-​expressing 
fibres in bronchial biopsy samples85. In accordance with 
these data, studies in animal models have demonstrated 
a central role of upregulated TRP channel expression 
or activity, including TRPV1, TRPA1 and TRPV4, 
in development of hypersensitivity to inhaled cough 
challenges86,87. Of note, however, clinical trials of TRPV1, 
TRPA1 and TRPV4 antagonists have failed to demon-
strate any benefit against natural cough in patients12,87, 
suggesting a disparity between animal and patient studies.
Animal studies also suggest that neural plasticity 
during pulmonary pathologies may relate to neuroin-
flammation within the vagus nerve or ganglia, character-
ized by increased inflammatory cell influx, upregulated 
inflammatory gene transcription and the release of 
inflammatory molecules from sensory neurons and res-
ident or infiltrating immune cells88–90. The cause of this 
neuroinflammation is unclear, but likely relates to both 
peripheral vagal detection of tissue inflammation and 
adverse effects of inflammation-​induced persistent fir-
ing of action potentials in sensory neurons88,91. Whether 
this occurs in humans is not proven, but is hypothesized 
as a cause of cough in some patients92.
Functional interactions between sensory fibre sub-
types in the brainstem can also affect cough. In humans, 
mechanical stimulation of the external ear can evoke 
coughing (Arnold’s reflex)32, which is attributed to 
Box 1 | Sensorimotor phenomenology
• Cough is an observable respiratory event in which the pattern of normal eupneic 
breathing is temporarily altered to allow for a forceful expiration, the normal purpose 
of which is to clear the airways of foreign materials, chemicals or secretions.
• A typical cough consists of three respiratory phases: first, a brief inspiratory phase  
to prime the lungs with a volume of air; second, a compression phase characterized  
by expiratory muscle contraction against a closed glottis, needed to ramp up 
intrapulmonary pressure; and finally third, the expiratory phase during which the 
glottis opens and high-​velocity expiratory airflow occurs233.
• Some types of cough may not include an inspiratory phase, especially during bouts  
of repetitive coughing. In events with glottic closure and expiratory effort, without 
preceding inspiration, the event is referred to as an expiration reflex. In the clinic, 
expiration reflexes cannot be distinguished from cough as they both produce similar 
sounds. The identification of an expiration reflex requires assessment of airflow with  
a pneumotachograph in the laboratory. The clinical relevance of the expiration reflex 
has therefore been difficult to study233.
• The induction of cough motor patterning is often linked to a reflex action, initiated by 
sensory detection of irritant stimuli in the airways leading to a brainstem-​mediated 
activation of cough motor pathways234, in much the same way that painful stimuli 
initiate spinal withdrawal reflexes. However, cough can also be a purely volitional act, 
initiated at will in the absence of any peripheral sensory stimuli. Similarly, voluntary 
control can be exerted to behaviourally change the intensity of an evoked cough 
effort, or to suppress coughing entirely107,235,236.
• Airway irritation can also give rise to perceivable sensations (such as an itchy or scratchy 
throat) referred clinically as the urge to cough. These sensations are thought to provide 
an awareness of the presence of irritating airway stimuli, and often contribute as much 
to patient morbidity as does cough itself. The urge to cough may be an important 
determinant of behavioural cough induction or regulation81,237.
6 | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 	
www.nature.com/nrdp
Primer
0123456789();: 
activation of the auricular branch of the vagus nerve, 
which projects to the paratrigeminal nucleus74,93. 
Co-​activation of cough Aδ fibres and C fibres may 
induce cough hypersensitivity94, whereas coughing 
is inhibited by activation of nasal menthol-​sensitive 
sensory fibres, lung stretch receptors and a subtype of 
C fibres innervating the lungs76,95,96.
Central sensitization of cough
Airway inflammation in animal models of lung disease 
is accompanied by altered synaptic transmission, and 
glial cell mobilization and activation within the nucleus 
of the solitary tract, resulting in elevated inflammatory 
mediators in the brainstem, including neurotrophic 
factors (NGF, BDNF and GDNF) and cytokines (IL-1β, 
IL-6 and TNF)97–100. These processes are expected to con-
tribute to cough hypersensitivity via amplifying inputs 
from cough sensory fibres. Consistent with this, upregu­
lated cough network activity in the midbrain has been 
demonstrated in patients with cough hypersensitivity101, 
in regions reportedly involved in the development of 
other sensory hypersensitivities102,103.
In humans, cough and the urge to cough are highly 
responsive to placebo104,105. The mechanisms of this phe-
nomenon are comparable to those of placebo analgesia 
and involve recruitment of a descending neural path-
way enacting opioid-​dependent suppression of sensory 
processing in the brainstem105,106.
Cough in humans can be voluntarily induced (or 
enhanced) and suppressed through higher brain motor 
control pathways107,108. In some patients, especially 
children, behavioural coughing (somatic cough syn-
drome) may be the primary cause of chronic cough109. 
Volitional cough suppression involves a brain network 
important for general motor response inhibition107,110,111. 
Patients with refractory chronic cough have attenuated 
volitional cough suppression112,113 and impaired engage-
ment of this cough inhibition network101. Cough and 
related brain activity are also modulated by acute pain-
ful stimuli applied to the skin86,114, via an extension of 
the conditioned pain modulation (CPM) phenomenon 
whereby noxious stimuli applied to one part of the body 
inhibit the processing of noxious stimuli applied else-
where. CPM of cough is also reduced in patients with 
refractory chronic cough114. These observations suggest 
that the pathophysiology of refractory chronic cough 
involves altered efficacy of multiple central cough sup-
pression processes. Components of these inhibitory 
systems that regulate cough use the inhibitory neuro-
transmitter GABA, and GABA receptor agonists mod-
ify evoked coughing in animals and in humans115,116. 
Patients with COPD do not have altered volitional cough 
suppression112, suggesting that distinct neural endotypes 
contribute to chronic cough81.
Cough in common diseases
Chronic cough in adults is commonly associated with 
asthma, non-​asthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis, GERD, 
upper airway conditions (including nasal and sinus 
disease) and laryngeal dysfunction46. However, chronic 
cough does not occur in all patients with these diseases, 
suggesting that additional pathophysiological processes 
are involved. The specific aetiology of cough hyper­
sensitivity and chronic cough likely differs both between 
and within patient groups, indicating that unique cough 
endotypes exist81. However, several general processes are 
thought to be important (Fig. 3).
Direct sensitization or activation of cough. In asthma, the 
mediators of bronchopulmonary inflammation might 
directly affect airway nerve fibre activity (Fig. 3). In some 
patients with asthma, chronic cough is the sole present-
ing symptom (known as cough variant asthma), whereas 
other patients with chronic cough have eosinophilic dis-
ease but not asthma, including non-​asthmatic eosino-
philic bronchitis and hypereosinophilic syndrome117,118. 
Whether different inflammatory processes contribute to 
cough across this spectrum of patients is unclear (Box 2). 
In patients with GERD, chronic cough could occur 
directly through refluxate stimulating vagal sensory 
fibres in the larynx and airways. However, studying this 
theory is difficult as the detection of laryngopharyngeal 
reflux is technically challenging with no objective meas-
ures for validation119,120, and detection of microaspiration 
through pepsin or bile acids in saliva, sputum or airway 
samples may not be reliable121. Of note, pepsin levels in 
patients with chronic cough are not different from those 
in healthy controls122–124. Gaseous reflux might also be 
important in chronic cough, but supportive evidence is 
lacking. In patients with upper airway cough syndrome, 
inflammation or mucus from the nose or sinuses may 
extend or drip down the pharyngeal wall to the larynx 
and activate cough sensory fibres. However, although 
many patients with chronic cough complain of a sen-
sation of post-​nasal drip, there is a paucity of research 
exploring the relevance of these processes125.
Indirect facilitation of cough. Direct stimulation of the 
oesophagus or nose rarely evokes coughing. However, 
activating extrapulmonary sensory fibres can act syn-
ergistically with cough sensory fibres to produce cough 
hypersensitivity65,126–128 (Fig. 3). Oesophageal acid instil-
lation, for example, via a naso-​oesophageal catheter, 
sensitizes cough evoked by inhaled capsaicin in healthy 
volunteers and causes coughing in patients with chronic 
cough129,130, while application of capsaicin to the nose of 
healthy volunteers sensitizes cough, and nasal menthol 
inhibits coughing95,131. Coughing follows reflux events 
in patients with chronic cough more often than would 
be expected by chance alone132–134, of which both acid 
and non-​acid reflux events are equally likely to precede 
coughing whereas reflux events extending to the prox-
imal oesophagus are not more likely to precede cough-
ing than distal events. These observations suggest that 
reflux, mucus or inflammatory mediators need not reach 
the airways to modulate coughing.
Diagnosis, screening and prevention
Initial evaluation of patients with chronic cough gen-
erally occurs in primary care, where treatment is com-
menced in those with symptoms, clinical signs and/or 
investigations that point to one or more potential under-
lying causes. Referral to secondary care specialists often 
occurs for more detailed investigation in those with an 
	
 7
NATURE REVIEWS | DiSEASE PRimERS | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 
Primer
0123456789();: 
elusive cause of cough and in those who do not respond 
to treatment in primary care. Referrals are typically to 
pulmonary specialists, but may also be to allergists, 
ear, nose and throat specialists or gastroenterologists, 
depending on the clinical presentation. Adults with 
multiple comorbid conditions can be referred to multi-
ple specialities, making the patient journey from diag-
nosis to assessment and treatment long. Patients with 
persistent cough despite detailed evaluation and further 
treatment trials in secondary care can be referred to spe-
cialist cough clinics. These clinics review the patients’ 
work-​up to ensure optimal treatment of comorbid condi-
tions that might be driving cough. In adults, attendance 
at a specialist cough clinic is often required to confirm 
a diagnosis of refractory cough or unexplained chronic 
cough, to use therapies that are of benefit in this patient 
Somatosensory cortex
Medial and lateral thalamus
Amygdala
Nucleus of the solitary tract
Paratrigeminal nucleus
Cerebrum
Medulla oblongata
Respiratory 
centres
Cingulate, 
orbitofrontal and 
prefrontal cortices
Lung
Tracheal
Laryngeal
Bronchial
Nav1.8
Nav1.7
Cl–
CLC
1
Vagal cough 
sensory nerve 
ﬁbre terminal
2
3
4
5
Jugular neuron 
speciﬁc
Nodose
pathway
Both nodose and 
jugular neurons
Nodose neuron 
speciﬁc
Jugular
pathway
Particulate matter, 
mucus and aspirate
Inﬂammatory mediators 
and irritant chemicals
Unknown receptor
TRPV1
TRPA1
TRPM8
P2X3
P2X2/3
ASICs
B2
TRKA
PGR
Mechanical
H+
Capsaicin
AITC
Menthol
ATP
ATP
H+
BK
NGF
PGs
Na+
NKCC1
Cl–
Na+
K+
Insula cortex
8 | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 	
www.nature.com/nrdp
Primer
0123456789();: 
group and often to provide opportunities for patients to 
participate in clinical research including trials of novel 
therapies. However, the provision of such services varies 
substantially between countries.
Clinical characteristics
Cough is an explosive effort associated with a character-
istic sound (Box 1). The distinct quality of the sound can 
be characterized, for example, wet cough (moist, loose, 
productive or rattling) or dry (barking or hoarse). Wet 
chronic cough is thought to be associated with diagno-
ses characterized by mucus production such as chronic 
bronchitis, COPD and bronchiectasis. Although clini-
cians can distinguish reliably wet from dry cough, the 
ability to diagnose the cause of cough from sound is 
poor; only 34% of cases in one case series135. In some 
patients, two or more distinct types of cough can coexist, 
for example, a wet and dry cough. In the clinic, the fre-
quency of cough sounds can be counted and the inten-
sity of individual cough efforts measured136. However, 
patients seldom describe the frequency of cough and 
are more likely to describe clusters of cough or bouts, 
cough intensity and cough triggers, typically providing 
subjective accounts of when they occur and how much 
it bothers them. The pattern of chronic cough may show 
waxing and waning over weeks or months.
Adults with chronic cough also frequently report 
throat clearing. Throat clearing, like cough, is thought to 
be an action to clear an unpleasant sensation or irritation 
and may represent an aspect of laryngeal dysfunction 
in chronic cough. Throat clearing may also result from 
the feeling of mucus stuck at the back of the throat that 
needs to be cleared, leading to mucus being swallowed. 
Throat clearing may be part of the spectrum of cough 
events but whether its presence is associated with spe-
cific diagnoses is not known. Whether patients distin-
guish throat clearing from cough, and the effect of this 
on patients’ perception of their morbidity is unknown.
Adults with chronic cough often display characteristic 
signs of cough hypersensitivity. Clinically this presents 
as allotussia, with patients reporting cough triggered by 
innocuous stimuli such as talking, eating and perfumes, 
and/or hypertussia, a heightened cough sensitivity 
to known tussive stimuli such as smoke, fumes and 
bleach11,120. Another common symptom of cough hyper-
sensitivity is the presence of an uncontrollable urge to 
cough. Sensations in the larynx (laryngeal paraesthesia) 
or chest such as tickle, itch or irritation can trigger 
coughing and can be more bothersome than the cough 
itself137. The presence of triggers and sensory symptoms 
may be the only feature to suggest the diagnosis of cough 
hypersensitivity. Although sensory symptoms are pres-
ent in most adults with chronic cough, <5% report no 
triggers or urge to cough138. Many patients with chronic 
cough, in addition to showing signs of cough hyper-
sensitivity, also display laryngeal hypersensitivity139. 
Laryngeal hypersensitivity and dysfunction often pres-
ent with chronic cough that is associated with vocal 
cord dysfunction, muscle tension dysphonia and globus 
(a sensation of a ‘lump’ in the throat (Box 3)).
Diagnostic work-​up
Recommendations for the evaluation of adults with 
chronic cough (Fig. 4) are based on the anatomical diag-
nostic protocol first proposed more than 40 years ago125 
and founded on the principle that structures innervated 
by vagal sensory fibres represent potential sites for 
generation of chronic cough3,140. This remains a useful 
approach as it can assist with identifying possible treat-
able conditions in some patients. Any comorbid condi-
tions involving these structures are initially presumed 
to be the cause of cough, recognizing that treatment of 
the presumed cause does not always improve the cough. 
Consequently, initial clinical assessment, investigations 
and trials of therapy tend to be focused on asthma, 
GERD and upper airway conditions (notably rhinitis, 
rhinosinusitis). A clinical history, focused on cough 
characteristics, associated sensations (such as urge to 
cough and need to clear throat), common cough trig-
gers, concomitant symptoms, combined with physical 
examination, represent the first important steps in eval-
uation of a patient with chronic cough3,140. Concomitant 
symptoms associated with gastro-​oesophageal reflux, 
and rhinosinusitis may indicate the causes of chronic 
cough, but a reliance solely on symptoms to guide man-
agement may be misleading. For example, the presence 
of upper airway symptoms may reflect only co-​existent 
rhinitis or rhinosinusitis, and the absence of heartburn 
does not exclude reflux as the cause of the cough3,141. 
Clinical findings are frequently unremarkable in patients 
referred with chronic cough but finger clubbing, evi-
dence of inflamed and/or obstructed nasal passages or 
the presence of wheeze or crackles on chest ausculta-
tion should inform consequent investigations and treat-
ment. Chest radiography and spirometry are mandatory 
for patients undergoing assessment for chronic cough3. 
Measurement of markers of type 2 inflammation, such as 
fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) or sputum eosin-
ophil count, may be useful in the early stage of work-​ups 
of patients with chronic cough. Additional tests such as 
chest CT, polysomnography and bronchoscopy should 
be requested depending on the physician’s review of the 
case as set out in Supplementary Table 1.
To help identify the underlying cause of chronic 
cough in children, paediatricians use the basic constructs 
Fig. 2 | Neural pathways and mechanisms that contribute to the generation of cough. 
(1) Vagal sensory neurons that are involved in cough innervate the larynx, trachea and 
main bronchi and, possibly, the lung parenchyma (blue and green dashed lines). Vagal Aδ 
fibres (whose cell bodies reside in the nodose ganglia) are activated by mechanical 
stimuli (such as inhaled particulate matter, mucus and aspirated gastric contents)  
and protons whereas vagal C fibres (whose cell bodies reside in the jugular ganglia)  
are activated by irritant chemicals and inflammatory mediators. (2) Vagal fibres involved 
in cough express several ion channels and receptors needed for transduction of diverse 
sensory stimuli and the formation, conduction and regulation of action potentials and  
(3) project to brainstem nuclei to coordinate cough motor patterning. (4) Distinct networks 
in the higher brain are involved in the behavioural regulation of cough, encoding of  
the urge to cough and for cognitive and affective processing. (5) Central mechanisms 
allow for volitional and cognitive modulation of cough through top-​down regulation of 
brainstem processing (black dashed lines). AITC, allyl isothiocyanate; ASICs, acid sensing 
ion channel subtypes; B2, bradykinin type 2 receptor; CLC, chloride channel subtypes; 
H+, protons/acid; Nav, voltage-​gated sodium channel subtypes; NGF, nerve growth factor; 
NKCC1, sodium (Na+) potassium (K+) chloride (Cl−) co-​transporter; P2X, purinergic receptor 
subtypes; PG, prostaglandin; PGR, prostaglandin receptor; TrkA, tyrosine receptor 
kinase A; TRP, transient receptor potential cation channel.
◀
	
 9
NATURE REVIEWS | DiSEASE PRimERS | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 
Primer
0123456789();: 
of cough characterization, pointers (such as traits) and 
red flags (Fig. 5). These concepts are useful in current 
clinical practice, evidenced by calculation of likelihood 
ratios142 and incorporation of these facets in paediatric 
cough algorithms143,144. Using cough algorithms to man-
age paediatric chronic cough is efficacious in improving 
clinical outcomes, demonstrated in cohort studies145, 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) based in specialist 
clinics145 and primary care144. Further details of the pae-
diatric diagnostic protocols are contained in the current 
guidelines3,143.
Cough assessment tools
Several validated tools are available to assess cough in 
clinical practice (Supplementary Box 1). Subjective assess-
ments of cough evaluate the patient’s perspective and 
1
Possible cortical reorganization, 
altered sensory perception and/or 
cognitive responses to airway inputs 
Sensitization and excessive activation 
of vagal sensory ﬁbres, terminal 
sprouting, phenotypic plasticity and 
possible neuroinﬂammation
Altered descending and 
inhibitory modulation
Altered midbrain 
processing
Synergistic convergent 
sensory inputs, synaptic 
plasticity and possible 
neuroinﬂammation
Lung 
diseases
Oesophageal
nerves
Bronchopulmonary
nerves
Nasal
disease
Tongue
Gastro-oesophageal 
reﬂux disease
Arnold’s
nerve
Laryngeal nerves
Trigeminal
nerve
2
3
4
5
Fig. 3 | Peripheral and central processes contributing to cough hyper­
sensitivity. (1) Preclinical studies have described potential mechanisms that 
affect vagal sensory nerve fibres that are driven by the inflammatory 
pathology of the underlying diseases and potentially reversed by 
disease-​specific therapy. (2) Functional synergy may also exist between 
sensory neurons innervating the various tissues shown. These interactions 
likely occur at the level of the brainstem, where convergence of vagal 
and/or trigeminal inputs leads to enhanced cough sensitivity. Peripheral 
organ pathologies have also been shown to alter synaptic efficacy in the 
brainstem, indicative of state of central sensitization. Patients with cough 
hypersensitivity have (3) increased activity in midbrain areas, and 
(4) a reduced ability to suppress coughing owing to a failure to recruit 
descending brain networks that subserve cough suppression. (5) Patients 
with chronic cough have a range of effects in the cognitive domain, 
suggestive of altered cortical processing of airway sensory information. 
Drugs that target vagal sensory neurons and inhibit their activity, 
neuromodulatory drugs that target brain processes involved in maintaining 
hypersensitive states, and speech and language therapy aimed at improving 
cough control, are all clinically useful antitussive options for patients with 
troublesome cough.
10 | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 	
www.nature.com/nrdp
Primer
0123456789();: 
include cough severity, intensity, effects on health-​related 
quality of life (HRQOL) and triggers and symptoms sug-
gestive of cough hypersensitivity. Objective assessments 
of cough measure cough frequency with sound or physi-
ological measures (electromyography (EMG), airflow or 
chest wall movement), intensity and the sensitivity of the 
cough reflex. Objective measures are important to ensure 
that measurements are specific to the disease and not 
influenced by comorbid conditions or traits such as anx-
iety and depression. The objective assessment of cough is 
largely confined to research and clinical trial use because 
the tools involve time-​consuming analysis, are expensive, 
and their clinical usefulness has not been established. The 
relationship between objective and subjective measures 
of cough is moderate at best146, suggesting that subjective 
and objective measures assess unique aspects of cough and 
should be viewed as complementary and equally valuable 
tools for evaluation of patients.
Cough monitoring tools have been useful to evaluate 
the efficacy of cough medicines, owing to the smaller 
sample size required for studies than for subjective tools. 
Moreover, monitoring tools address the preference of 
some medicines regulatory agencies to include objective 
end points in clinical trials147. Cough reflex sensitivity 
tests have been used extensively in preclinical mecha-
nistic studies and for drug development and dosing148. 
They are often not useful for assessing the efficacy of 
treatment as they are not predictive of a reduction in 
coughing in patients149. Although patients with cough 
have significantly lower thresholds for coughing during 
challenge tests compared with healthy individuals, the 
ranges can overlap, limiting their diagnostic potential150. 
Improving the sensitivity and specificity of cough chal-
lenge tests might be possible by standardizing equipment, 
protocols and analysis methods151.
Screening and prevention
Screening for chronic cough is not carried out in clini-
cal practice. How screening could be done and whether 
it would lead to clinical benefit is unclear. Screening 
patients with chronic respiratory disease may be ben-
eficial as cough is often overlooked during clinical 
evaluation. Moreover, early identification may improve 
the quality of life (QOL) of patients and possibly avoid 
over-​treatment by specifically targeting cough. One 
simple screening method is a numerical rating scale 
that assesses cough severity and ascertains the duration 
of cough. Screening the general population could iden-
tify patients with respiratory disorders such as COPD, 
asthma, lung cancer and smoking-​related chronic bron-
chitis at an earlier stage. The most important diagnosis is 
that of lung cancer, where development of a cough may 
be the first symptom, particularly in a smoker.
Whether non-​smoking-​related chronic cough is pre-
ventable is unknown. A greater understanding of the 
mechanism of cough, particularly cough hypersensitivity, 
is needed.
Management
The management of patients with chronic cough can 
be prolonged and complex, especially in patients with 
multiple comorbidities requiring treatment and when 
the cough may ultimately be refractory to such inter-
ventions. Therefore, management includes treatment of 
comorbid conditions that are potentially driving chronic 
cough and therapies directed at cough hypersensitivity 
in patients with refractory or unexplained cough.
Disease-​specific therapy
For many adults with chronic cough, treatment of com­
orbid asthma, GERD or nasal disease (upper airway 
cough syndrome) improves their cough. However, few 
RCTs have assessed the efficacy of treatments compared 
with placebo in reducing cough in those with these 
conditions.
Asthma. Several RCTs have assessed the efficacy of 
asthma therapies in patients with asthma and chronic 
cough, but few trials have been performed in the past 
decade, so more recent inhaled therapies are poorly 
represented44. The CHEST and European Respiratory 
Society guidelines suggest increasing inhaled corticos-
teroid dose and considering trials of leukotriene inhib-
itors and β-​agonists in those for whom the treatment 
response to inhaled corticosteroids is incomplete, on 
the basis of evidence obtained in classical asthma3,44. The 
use of inhaled corticosteroid is considered the first-​line 
treatment in adults with cough variant asthma. Of note, 
Box 2 | Cough in asthma and related disorders
• Cough is a common symptom of asthma. Patients with less well-​controlled asthma 
than those with well-​controlled asthma usually cough more frequently238, and bron-
choconstriction and allergen exposure are known to sensitize and/or provoke 
coughing in people with asthma239,240. However, in the laboratory, bronchoconstriction 
and cough pathways can be separately inhibited241,242, and the severity of cough does 
not always reflect asthma severity. Some patients with well-​controlled asthma may 
experience chronic cough. Chronic cough is the primary presenting symptom in 
patients with cough variant asthma238, while in the paediatric literature isolated 
cough is rarely asthma143.
• Patients with classical asthma have heightened responses to inhaled irritants such as 
capsaicin compared with healthy controls, although not to the same degree as those 
presenting with chronic cough240,243. The mechanisms leading to this remain elusive. 
Airway nerve density and neuronal branching are increased in bronchoscopy samples 
obtained from patients with classical asthma, like those seen in patients with chronic 
cough without asthma84,244.
• The precise mechanisms that underlie why some patients develop cough variant 
asthma as opposed to other asthma phenotypes is unclear, and few studies have 
compared cough variant asthma with other phenotypes. Sputum eosinophilia might 
be less in cough variant asthma than in typical asthma, and patients with cough 
variant asthma have normal ventilation function or less severe impairment of lung 
function245,246. However, patients with non-​asthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis, without 
variable airway obstruction or hyper-​responsiveness characteristic of asthma, also 
present with chronic cough247.
• The localization of mast cells within airway smooth muscle in patients with asthma 
but not in patients with non-​asthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis has been proposed  
as an explanation for the lack of bronchial hyper-​responsiveness in non-​asthmatic 
eosinophilic bronchitis. However, as other histological features are similar, it is unclear 
why patients with non-​asthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis present with chronic cough 
without airway obstruction and hyper-​responsiveness248. The difference in airway 
function observed in subjects with eosinophilic bronchitis and asthma could be due  
to differences in mediator (such as prostaglandin E2 (ref.249)) production in the airways. 
Eosinophils may interact with airway sensory nerve fibres in people with asthma  
and promote increased airway sensory fibre density, nerve remodelling and airway 
hyper-​reactivity244, while no relationship between eosinophils and increased nerve 
fibre density was noted in patients with chronic cough without asthma84.
	
 11
NATURE REVIEWS | DiSEASE PRimERS | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 
Primer
0123456789();: 
the efficacy of inhaled therapies for asthma in patients 
with chronic cough can be subverted if the inhaled treat-
ment evokes coughing. In this situation, a short course 
of oral prednisolone can be the simplest means of assess-
ing the response of chronic coughing to asthma therapy. 
In children, chronic cough should not be attributed to 
asthma unless other symptoms or signs are present152, 
and cough in paediatric asthma should not be regarded 
as a marker of severity.
GERD. Treatments for GERD include proton pump 
inhibitors (PPIs, which reduce the acidity of refluxate), 
histamine (H2) receptor blockers (which have a similar, 
but more prolonged, effect to PPIs) and lifestyle meas-
ures such as weight loss, elevating the head of the bed 
and avoidance of eating before bedtime. Small RCTs of 
acid-​suppressing therapy (PPIs and H2 receptor block-
ers) in patients with chronic cough have been performed 
but did not report positive results; a pooled analysis of 
these data suggests that adults with acid reflux on 24 h 
pH monitoring or symptoms of heartburn are most 
likely to experience benefit, which is now reflected in 
clinical guidelines4,141,153. Observational data support 
this approach, but response rates were low (28%) even in 
patients with chronic cough who reported heartburn154. 
Treatments for non-​acid reflux are limited. Promotility 
agents (such as the dopamine antagonists metoclopr-
amide and domperidone) can be prescribed only for 
short-​term use owing to their adverse effects and lack 
of evidence of efficacy in reflux-​related chronic cough. 
Macrolide antibiotics promote gastric emptying, but 
small studies in patients with refractory chronic cough 
failed to show benefit155,156. Baclofen, a GABAB agonist, 
blocks relaxation of the lower oesophageal sphincter, 
and therefore all types of reflux, but has unacceptable 
adverse effects for long-​term use, whereas lesogaberan 
(a peripherally acting GABAB agonist with fewer adverse 
effects) did not reduce cough frequency in patients with 
refractory chronic cough in a RCT. Laparoscopic fun-
doplication, a keyhole surgical procedure whereby the 
upper part of the stomach is wrapped around the lower 
oesophagus so as to prevent the reflux of acid from the 
stomach into the oesophagus, in patients with GERD 
and chronic cough is rarely indicated owing to lim-
ited evidence for efficacy and high risk of long-​term 
complications.
The management of children with GERD is depend-
ent on age and disease severity. Acid-​suppressive therapy 
should not be used solely for chronic cough in children 
with GERD and chronic cough157. Also, treatment of 
children with chronic cough is dependent on their age, 
feeding regimen and symptoms. PPIs and H2 receptor 
antagonists should not be used for longer than 4–8 weeks 
in paediatric patients, regardless of effectiveness, without 
further evaluation157. Should they prove to be success-
ful in controlling the cough, they can be continued for 
longer periods, although the guidelines for managing 
paediatric GERD recommend a gastroscopy with bio­
psies and other tests to confirm anatomy and exclude 
other causes by histology of the biopsy samples158.
Upper airway cough syndrome. The treatment of 
patients with chronic cough and nasal disease is stand-
ard care for the diagnosed nasal condition. Allergic or 
nonallergic rhinitis is treated with nasal corticosteroids, 
first or second generation and intranasal antihistamines, 
decongestants and, if sinusitis is present, antibiotics. The 
potential role of nasal surgery in patients with chronic 
cough is unclear159,160. Clinical trials evaluating the 
effectiveness of targeting concurrent nasal diseases to 
control chronic cough are lacking; therefore, predictors 
of improvement in chronic cough remain uncertain161.
COPD, bronchiectasis and interstitial lung disease. 
Cough, typically productive, is a common first symptom 
of COPD and is usually attributed to cigarette smok-
ing and also as a result of exposure to environmental 
pollutants162. Chronic bronchitis is a distinct pheno-
type of COPD and is defined as chronic cough produc-
tive of sputum for 3 months over the course of a year for 
two consecutive years163. In established disease, cough 
is reported in 70% of patients47 and many consider it 
to be extremely severe. Moreover, cough is a prominent 
feature of disease exacerbations and is associated with 
adverse clinical outcomes48,164,165. Measuring the sever-
ity and burden of cough using symptom-​based ques-
tionnaires is now recommended in the routine clinical 
evaluation of patients with COPD166. Chronic cough 
accompanied by the expectoration of large quantities 
of mucopurulent sputum is a central clinical feature of 
bronchiectasis. Typically coughing is much worse dur-
ing exacerbations and contributes to impaired health 
status167. Impaired airway clearance, mucus retention 
and bacterial colonization cause inflammation and lung 
damage, which contribute to cough severity but are inde-
pendent of cough reflex sensitivity168. Cough is a com-
mon and disabling symptom in idiopathic pulmonary 
fibrosis and may be due to inflammatory consequences 
Box 3 | Laryngeal hypersensitivity and dysfunction in chronic cough
• Laryngeal hypersensitivity refers to the excessive, abnormal, laryngeal adduction  
of the vocal cords during breathing or exercise, resulting in laryngeal dysfunction250. 
Laryngeal hypersensitivity and dysfunction represent an increased responsiveness  
of laryngeal protective reflexes triggered by mechanical or chemical stimuli and are 
considered to be part of the cough hypersensitivity syndrome.
• Laryngeal hypersensitivity and dysfunction are present in many patients with chronic 
cough and cough hypersensitivity139,251. They are often associated with comorbid 
post-​nasal drip, rhinosinusitis, gastro-​oesophageal reflux disease and asthma252.
• Symptoms are usually localized to the laryngeal area, for example, ‘scratchy’ or ‘tickly’ 
feeling of an urge to cough, or sometimes inspiratory stridor of airflow or feeling of 
suffocation or difficulty in breathing.
• Laryngeal dysfunction in patients with refractory chronic cough has been associated 
with paradoxical vocal fold movement manifesting as vocal cord dysfunction with 
episodes of suffocation or difficulty in breathing or laryngospasm253. Other aspects of 
laryngeal dysfunction include muscle tension dysphonia that can be revealed during 
vocalization250.
• Investigations include direct laryngoscopic examination of vocal fold motion during 
challenge (using external triggers such as exercise or scents), laryngeal electromyogram 
and voice assessment254.
• Laryngeal hypersensitivity and dysfunction in patients with chronic refractory cough 
may respond to speech pathology intervention and behavioural management of 
cough, with the use of voice therapy techniques and breathing exercises255. Cough 
neuromodulators such as amitriptyline and gabapentin might also be beneficial.
12 | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 	
www.nature.com/nrdp
Primer
0123456789();: 
of the fibrosis itself or to comorbid reflux disease. No 
medicines are approved to treat cough in these patients, 
and current consensus is based on limited evidence51.
Nonspecific pharmacological therapies
Pharmacological therapies directed at eliminating cough 
are required in cases in which treatment of comorbid 
disease associated with cough is unsuccessful at relieving 
coughing, or in those with no obvious cause for a chronic 
cough. These therapies are restricted to use in adults as, 
for cough management purposes, the age cut-​off for use 
in children is usually 14 years. Whether patients other 
than those with refractory or unexplained chronic cough 
would benefit from adjunct nonspecific cough therapy is 
unclear, and controlled trials are needed.
Opiates. Codeine and morphine are commonly used 
antitussives in adult-​based clinical practice and have 
antitussive effects via central opioid receptors169. 
Accordingly, effective antitussive doses of opiates are 
likely to cause sedation. The opioid subtype by which 
opiates inhibit cough remains debatable, as μ-, κ- or 
δ-​opioid receptor agonists are all antitussive170. Opioid 
receptors are also localized to vagal sensory neurons, 
and their activation can suppress sensory fibre activity; 
however, unlike oral codeine or intravenous morphine, 
inhaled morphine or codeine does not inhibit inhaled 
capsaicin-​induced cough, arguing against a peripheral 
antitussive effect of opiates171. Opiates have no role in 
the management of children with chronic cough as they 
can cause death143.
Codeine has a rapid onset of action. Although 
widely used, the efficacy of codeine is not supported 
by clinical studies. Several placebo-​controlled RCTs 
for cough have been published without objective 
cough measurements172,173, and other trials did not 
report significant benefits of codeine over placebo174,175. 
Moreover, codeine has several concerns regarding 
safety, inter-​individual variability in metabolism and 
dependence176, although risk of dependence may be low 
in those without vulnerability to dependence177. Adverse 
effects of codeine, such as nausea, constipation, dys-
pepsia, dizziness or somnolence, occur in up to 50% of 
patients and are mostly non-​critical in adults178.
Morphine is ~10 times more potent than codeine 
and is most often considered in patients with severe 
Adult with cough lasting >8 weeks (chronic cough)
Cause of cough 
conﬁrmed
Yes
Cough resolved?
Consider
• Speech and language intervention
• Refer to specialist cough clinic 
• Trial of neuromodulatory agents or low-dose opiates
• Recruit to clinical trial 
Optimize treatment and manage adherence
Cause of cough 
conﬁrmed
Unexplained 
chronic cough 
diagnosis
Cough resolved?
Any remaining investigations to be undertaken?
Were treatment 
trials optimal and 
patient adherent?
Any remaining investigations 
to be undertaken?
Order investigations, review 
with results and treat as 
indicated
History and physical examination focused on cough 
characteristics, triggers and clinical features to determine 
evidence for common pulmonary and extrapulmonary causes
Review current chest radiology and 
spirometry ± reversibility testing or fractional 
exhaled nitric oxide measurement
No
Cough resolved?
Yes
Cough resolved?
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Cause of cough 
conﬁrmed
Yes
Refractory chronic 
cough diagnosis
No
No
Yes
No
Cause of cough 
conﬁrmed
Cough resolved?
Yes
Manage according to current 
guidelines and review
Yes
Any obvious primary pulmonary or 
extrapulmonary cause for cough?
No
Fig. 4 | Evaluation and management of chronic cough in adults. A proposed algorithm for the clinical management of 
patients with chronic cough, including recommendations for managing difficult-​to-​treat cough. The algorithm was devised 
using recommendations contained in existing clinical guidelines and other reference material3,4,10,46,232.
	
 13
NATURE REVIEWS | DiSEASE PRimERS | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 
Primer
0123456789();: 
intractable cough. One trial demonstrated that low-​dose 
slow-​release morphine therapy was associated with sig-
nificant improvements in subjective cough measures 
(Leicester Cough Questionnaire and daily cough sever-
ity scores) in patients with refractory chronic cough179. 
The most common adverse effects were constipation 
and drowsiness. The effects of morphine were mostly 
observed within a week, but benefit was observed in 
<50% of patients. Morphine is associated with sev-
eral safety concerns, including respiratory depression, 
drowsiness and addiction, depending on the dose180.
Gabapentinoids. The GABA derivatives gabapentin 
and pregabalin are inhibitors of α2δ subunit-​containing 
voltage-​dependent calcium channels and possibly 
NMDA receptors181,182. Gabapentinoids freely pass the 
blood–brain barrier and are commonly used for treat-
ment of seizures and neuropathic pain, although the sites 
of central action are poorly understood. In one 10-​week 
RCT183, gabapentin significantly improved subjective 
cough measures and objective cough frequency in 
patients with chronic refractory cough; however, clinical 
benefits were not sustained after treatment cessation. No 
improvement in capsaicin cough reflex sensitivity was 
observed, suggesting a lack of effect on cough hyper-
sensitivity. Of note, some patients do not experience any 
improvement in cough with gabapentin. Pregabalin, as 
an add-​on to speech therapy, significantly improved sub-
jective cough measures compared with speech therapy 
alone at week 14 (ref.184). However, the effects of pregab-
alin on objective cough frequency were not significant. 
Gabapentinoids cause common, and sometimes intol-
erable, adverse effects, including dizziness, disorienta-
tion, confusion, fatigue and blurred vision. The benefit 
of long-​term use of gabapentinoids is difficult to predict 
given these adverse events.
Tricyclic antidepressants. Amitriptyline increases nora­
drenergic or serotonergic neurotransmission by block-
ing presynaptic noradrenaline or serotonin transporters 
Cause of cough 
conﬁrmed
Cause of cough 
conﬁrmed
Consider and manage as required
• Bronchiectasis or recurrent pneumonia
• Aspiration
• Chronic infection
• Interstitial lung disease
• Airway abnormality
• Cardiac disorder
• Other less common pulmonary conditions
Cause of cough 
conﬁrmed
Cause of cough conﬁrmed
• Asthma or asthma-like
Trial inhaled corticosteroids
Cough resolved?
If wet cough, treat as 
protracted bacterial 
bronchitis with antibiotics
Discuss options with parents
Assess evidence for non-speciﬁc cough 
Evaluate tobacco smoke and other pollutants
Watch, wait and review in 2 weeks
• Usually postviral cough or acute bronchitis
• Rarely foreign body asthma, upper airway 
disorders, adverse reaction to medicines, 
functional disorders, pertussis, 
Mycoplasma, GERD or ear problems
Manage according to current 
guidelines and review
Any obvious primary pulmonary or 
extrapulmonary cause for cough?
Cough resolved?
Cough resolved?
No
Yes
No
History and physical examination focused on cough 
characteristics and clinical features to determine evidence 
for common pulmonary and extrapulmonary causes
Review current chest radiology and 
spirometry or consider fractional 
exhaled nitric oxide measurement
Child with cough lasting >4 weeks (chronic cough)
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Cough resolved?
Yes
Cease therapy
Yes
Fig. 5 | Evaluation and management of chronic cough in children. A proposed algorithm for the clinical management of 
paediatric patients with chronic cough. The algorithm was devised using recommendations contained in existing clinical 
guidelines3,143. GERD, gastro-​oesophageal reflux disease.
14 | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 	
www.nature.com/nrdp
Primer
0123456789();: 
and has strong binding affinities for α-​adrenergic, his-
tamine (H1) and muscarinic (M1) receptors185. In one 
randomized trial, treatment with low-​dose amitripty-
line at bedtime was significantly more effective than 
codeine and guaifenesin combinatorial treatment in 
improvement of subjective measures of cough in those 
with post-​viral cough hypersensitivity186. Moreover, 
one small observational study found an improvement 
of >50% in 67% of patients with idiopathic (refractory 
or unexplained) cough 2–3 months after starting treat-
ment; however, only one-​third of patients were still on 
the treatment after 2–3 years, with 53% reporting an 
improvement of >50%187. A controlled, double-​blind 
study of amitriptyline in chronic cough is needed. The 
most common adverse effects of amitriptyline are dry 
mouth, dizziness, headache and somnolence.
Nonspecific cough suppression and the risk of dystussia. 
Cough has an important protective function in the res-
piratory tract in healthy individuals and patients as it 
is needed to expel excessive airway secretions, prevent 
aspiration and protect against inhaled irritant stimuli, 
such as smoke. An ideal cough suppressant, therefore, 
would reduce unwanted, excessive coughing without 
suppression of protective cough, essentially targeting 
the hypersensitive state. Studies in laboratory animals 
and humans have demonstrated that opiates and other 
centrally acting neuromodulators (gabapentin and 
baclofen) can inhibit cough evoked by a broad range of 
chemical and mechanical stimuli188–191. This action is a 
dose-​dependent generalized suppression of the nervous 
system (sedation), inhibition of the brainstem neurons 
involved in generating respiratory rhythm and/or direct 
suppression of cough sensory nerve activity169,192,193. 
Consequently, some nonspecific cough suppressants 
might cause dystussia, although the prevalence of this is 
not well documented. One post hoc analysis of patients 
receiving morphine and codeine for cough suppression 
suggests that sedation is unlikely to contribute to their 
cough-​suppressing properties194, whereas gabapentin 
improved cough-​specific QOL in patients with refrac-
tory cough without suppressing capsaicin cough reflex 
sensitivity183. Risk of dystussia and aspiration is likely 
related to dosing195,196, and some patient groups who are 
more prone to dystussia (such as the elderly and patients 
with spinal trauma or neurological disease) may be more 
susceptible to generalized cough suppression by centrally 
acting nonspecific cough therapies197,198. At least one 
new peripherally acting nonspecific cough therapy in 
clinical trial (the P2X3 antagonist, gefapixant) has been 
shown not to produce generalized cough suppression at 
therapeutic doses148.
Speech and language therapy
Speech and language therapy consists of education, 
cough control and suppression techniques, breath-
ing exercises, vocal hygiene, hydration strategies and 
counselling199 (Box 4). Two randomized controlled 
studies have evaluated the effectiveness of speech and 
language therapy for adults with unexplained or refrac-
tory chronic cough. One study200 found that 88% of par-
ticipants in the treatment group showed improvement 
in symptom frequency and severity scores for breath-
ing, cough, voice and upper airway symptoms, com-
pared with 14% of participants in the placebo group. 
Another multicentre RCT201 found an improvement in 
cough-​specific QOL and a reduction in cough frequency 
in the treatment group compared with the control group. 
No significant difference was found between therapy and 
control groups regarding subjective measures of cough 
and cough reflex sensitivity.
The antitussive mechanisms of action of speech and 
language therapy remain unclear. One hypothesis is 
that improved understanding of the condition through 
education and counselling, along with training in sup-
pression strategies, may affect the decreased inhibitory 
control of cough that is present in such patients65,92,101. 
However, empirical studies to address this have not 
been conducted. An improvement in paradoxical vocal 
fold movement and dysfunctional breathing may also 
contribute to control of cough202.
Treatment of children
Successfully managing a child with chronic cough (lead-
ing to cough resolution) is dependent on identifying the 
aetiology of the cough and treating it (see current clini-
cal guidelines3,143). Therefore, the suggested approach for 
managing children with chronic cough aims to identify 
the underlying cause, provide attention to contributing 
factors (such as tobacco smoke exposure) and under-
stand the effect of the cough on the child and their par-
ents or guardians3,143,145. Children aged >14 years are 
usually managed in accordance with adult pathways.
Quality of life
QOL is one of the key end points in clinical trials with 
novel antitussives, and it also aids clinical practice guide-
line decision-​making3. Cough has significant effects on 
physical and mental health. Effects in adults include 
urinary incontinence, pain, sleep disturbance, interfer-
ence with speech, anxiety and depression, avoidance of 
social situations and inability to work203. Less common 
but severe complications include syncope and head 
injury, hernia, suicidal ideation and rib fracture203. Stress 
urinary incontinence is under-​recognized in adults 
with cough: ~65% of patients with chronic cough are 
Box 4 | Speech and language therapy management of chronic cough
The approach to cough-​specific speech and language therapy involves four steps.
• Education. Patients are provided education on the biology of coughing, chronic 
cough and cough hypersensitivity, and the negative effects of repeated coughing  
and throat clearing are explained.
• Vocal hygiene. Vocal and laryngeal hygiene and hydration are advised with a 
reduction in caffeine and alcohol intake. Nasal breathing with nasal douching  
may be recommended with nasal steam inhalation.
• Cough control/suppression training. Following identification of patient cough 
triggers, patients are taught a range of suppression strategies including forced/dry 
swallow, sipping water, chewing gum or sucking non-​medicated sweets. Breathing 
pattern re-​education is used to promote relaxed abdominal breathing while inhaling 
through the nose.
• Psycho-​educational counselling. Behaviour modification is used to reduce over- 
awareness of the need to cough and facilitate an individual’s internalization of control 
over their cough and to help manage stress and anxiety.
	
 15
NATURE REVIEWS | DiSEASE PRimERS | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 
Primer
0123456789();: 
female and 65% will experience cough-​induced urinary 
incontinence204. Patients with cough-​induced urinary 
incontinence are often too embarrassed to mention it 
to their physician. In some patients, the inability to con-
trol the urge to cough or throat tickle sensation can be 
worse than the cough itself138. In children, the key effects 
of chronic cough are annoyance, frustration, tiredness 
and effects on activities205, whereas effects on parents of 
children with chronic cough are worries on aetiology 
of cough, helplessness and sleep disturbance206. Data on 
the economic burden of chronic cough are lacking.
QOL can be assessed informally in the clinic by ask-
ing patients about the effects that are known to be associ-
ated with cough. HRQOL questionnaires can be used to 
quantify QOL in a validated and standardized manner. 
QOL tools have broad applicability, even in conditions 
with considerable heterogeneity that can limit the use-
fulness of objective tools. They capture aspects of disease 
severity that is not possible with objective tools, such as 
general health effects like fatigue and sleep disturbance, 
among others. In patients with cough, QOL tools can 
assess intensity and urge to cough, which cannot be 
assessed with cough frequency monitors207. This is par-
ticularly important for patients who cough infrequently 
but are greatly bothered by it.
Studies of QOL in patients with chronic cough using 
validated tools have found significantly worse QOL in 
women than in men30. Women had lower QOL owing 
to physical complaints, psychosocial issues and severe 
physical complaints. The greatest disparity between the 
sexes was due to stress urinary incontinence in women. 
Patients with a longer duration of cough, depression, 
younger age and interference with speech owing to 
cough also have worse QOL208. The presence of urge 
to cough is also highly correlated with impairment in 
QOL208. One longitudinal study of patients undergoing 
treatment for chronic cough found that improvement in 
cough was associated with a significant improvement 
in QOL at 3 months and continued improvement at 
6 months208–210. This improvement was associated with 
improvements in urinary incontinence, urge to cough 
and anxiety symptoms208. Future studies to address 
gaps in knowledge should establish the frequency and 
characteristics of complications of cough to improve 
management and understand the direction of the rela-
tionship between cough, anxiety and depression. The 
economic impact of cough on individuals also needs to 
be investigated.
The Leicester Cough Questionnaire is the most 
widely used HRQOL tool in adults. This tool consists 
of 19 items that address physical, psychological and 
social domains211, has good repeatability and respon-
siveness, and the minimal important clinical difference 
has been established212. This questionnaire was used to 
demonstrate improvement in HRQOL in a randomized, 
placebo-​controlled and double-​blind phase III trial 
assessing antitussive activity of the P2X3 receptor antag-
onist, gefapixant213. The Cough QOL Questionnaire 
(CQLQ) is another validated tool for adult patients with 
chronic cough210. The CQLQ comprises 28 items, has 
good repeatability and responsiveness, and the minimal 
important clinical difference has been established214. 
HRQOL assessments are also valuable in the paedi-
atric setting and are performed using acute cough215 
or child-​specific chronic cough205 HRQOL tools. As 
a child’s illness and management affects the QOL of 
their family, 27-​item and 8-​item generic parent-​proxy 
HRQOL tools are available for use in conjunction with 
cough-​specific HRQOL assessments206,216.
Little is known about the long-​term outcomes 
of patients with chronic cough. In a study following 
patients for 7 years, only 14% of patients had resolution 
of cough although 26% reported a reduction in cough 
severity. No predictors of improvement in cough were 
found8. Chronic cough may be associated with long-​term 
health risks, such as risks of mortality, morbidity or drug 
adverse effects, although these have not been elucidated 
in patients with chronic cough.
Outlook
Key gaps in knowledge
Despite advances in understanding the mechanisms of 
chronic cough and improvements in therapeutic devel-
opment, our understanding of the relationship between 
cough hypersensitivity and chronic cough is incomplete. 
For example, although some therapeutic benefit has 
been shown using treatments that target mechanisms 
putatively involved in establishing or maintaining hyper-
sensitivity, these treatments do not work for all patients 
and they do not provide complete resolution of cough 
in most patients who do show responsivity12. Whether 
this observation reflects the existence of multiple con-
current processes involved in cough hypersensitivity, 
yet-​to-​be-​discovered ‘lynch pin’ processes or a lack of 
involvement of cough hypersensitivity in all patients is 
unclear. This is notable in children where evidence for 
cough hypersensitivity is lacking and targeting specific 
clinical conditions results in effective cough resolution.
We do not know whether any relationships exist with 
respect to the presentation of chronic cough across the 
lifespan. For example, an important question to answer is 
whether cough hypersensitivity evolves in some patients 
owing to the presence of a troublesome cough earlier in 
life. As such, whether children with chronic cough have 
a higher risk of cough hypersensitivity in adulthood is 
unknown. Indeed, genetic determinants might affect 
the risk of cough hypersensitivity, although this area of 
research is understudied. One challenge in investigat-
ing future health effects of chronic cough lies in the lack 
of a distinct diagnostic code for chronic cough in the 
International Classification of Diseases (ICD) system217. 
Establishment of a code that categorizes chronic cough 
as a disease will facilitate large-​scale routinely collected 
health data to further understand the burden and 
epidemiology of chronic cough.
The answers to many of the lingering questions 
are dependent on improved understanding of the 
multiple clinical dimensions of cough. As mentioned 
earlier, subjective patient reports of disease severity 
and effects on QOL do not always track linearly with 
objective measures of cough frequency. Moreover, the 
aspects of chronic cough that have the greatest effects 
on patients’ lives are poorly understood. This lack of 
knowledge is problematic in trials of therapies that rely 
16 | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 	
www.nature.com/nrdp
Primer
0123456789();: 
on only one output as the primary end point measure; 
for example, only short-​term (≤24 h) objective cough 
frequency is used by drug regulators in clinical trials 
of new antitussive therapies, meaning that drugs that 
bring about clinically important improvements in 
patient-​reported outcomes, but not cough frequency, 
are unlikely to advance. Yet in other clinical hypersensi-
tivities, for example, chronic pain, subjective measures 
of pain severity and QOL are accepted as gold standard 
end point measures. Newer, less-​invasive, devices for 
counting coughs over longer periods of time in natu-
ral settings, potentially assessing other aspects of cough 
including the variability of cough, and analysis of the 
sound, intensity, cough bout duration and the time 
of day218 may disentangle the relationships between 
objective and subjective measures, but ultimately an 
acceptance of the clinical importance of the subjective 
dimensions of cough is needed.
Endotypes and personalized medicine
Multiple mechanisms and aetiologies may underlie 
cough hypersensitivity. Recent suggestions of cough 
endotypes may help clinical management of cough. 
Conventionally, these endotypes relate to the underly-
ing clinical condition (such as asthma, GERD or upper 
airway cough syndrome)81 but there may be other ways 
to endotype patients with cough; however, this needs to 
be explored. Clinical trials with P2X3 antagonists sug-
gest that a subset of patients with refractory chronic 
cough respond well to purinergic inhibition, perhaps 
reflecting a currently unrecognized endotype213. Trials 
of other antitussives have similarly shown heterogene-
ity in responsivity that may reflect differing pathological 
processes driving cough in different patients. A more 
careful assessment of this heterogeneity may identify 
clear endotypes, which then allows more personalized 
approaches to cough management.
Emerging therapies
Improved understanding of cough neurophysiology has 
advanced the development of new antitussive therapies, 
several of which are progressing through clinical trials 
(Supplementary Table 2). Molecules targeting P2X3 
and P2X2/3 ATP receptors have demonstrated efficacy 
in reducing cough counts, and at least four companies 
have molecules in advanced clinical trials. Gefapixant 
is the first such compound to have completed phase III 
trials and demonstrated efficacy in adults with refrac-
tory chronic cough213, while three other molecules have 
completed phase II trials (Supplementary Table 2). 
Trials have also been conducted with centrally acting 
neurokinin 1 receptor antagonists, which have demon-
strated some clinical benefit, notably in patients with 
lung cancer presenting with chronic cough80. Drugs in 
earlier phases of clinical development are those target-
ing sodium channels involved in cough sensory neuron 
action potential conduction219. Whether these thera-
pies will show efficacy in patients is unknown. Trials 
with various TRP channel agents have been negative 
(Supplementary Table 2), and enthusiasm for these 
drugs as therapeutic targets has waned.
One challenge for these antitussive studies is over-
coming the large placebo effect that accompanies cur-
rent trial designs. The development of improved animal 
models that better recapitulate the processes that under-
pin chronic cough and cough hypersensitivity, along 
with reimagined clinical trial designs and/or improved 
end point measures may be required to identify true 
therapeutic efficacies. Furthermore, clinical trials for 
new compounds have only been assessed in adults, 
mostly those with refractory chronic cough, and it will 
be important to ascertain the clinical use of these new 
antitussives in other patients and in children.
Published online xx xx xxxx
1.	
Irwin, R. S. et al. Diagnosis and management of cough 
executive summary: ACCP evidence-​based clinical 
practice guidelines. Chest 129, 1s–23s (2006).
2.	
Cherry, D. K., Burt, C. W. & Woodwell, D. A. National 
ambulatory medical care survey: 2001 summary.  
Adv. Data 337, 1–44 (2003).
3.	
Morice, A. H. et al. ERS guidelines on the diagnosis 
and treatment of chronic cough in adults and children. 
Eur. Respir. J. 55, 1901136 (2020).  
Latest guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment 
of chronic cough in adults and children that take  
a biomarker approach.
4.	
Morice, A. H. et al. ERS guidelines on the assessment 
of cough. Eur. Respir. J. 29, 1256–1276 (2007).
5.	
Chang, A. B. & Glomb, W. B. Guidelines for evaluating 
chronic cough in pediatrics: ACCP evidence-​based 
clinical practice guidelines. Chest 129, 260s–283s 
(2006).
6.	
Song, W. J. et al. Defining chronic cough: a systematic 
review of the epidemiological literature. Allergy Asthma 
Immunol. Res. 8, 146–155 (2016).
7.	
Everett, C. F., Kastelik, J. A., Thompson, R. H.  
& Morice, A. H. Chronic persistent cough in the 
community: a questionnaire survey. Cough 3,  
5 (2007).
8.	
Yousaf, N., Montinero, W., Birring, S. S. & Pavord, I. D. 
The long term outcome of patients with unexplained 
chronic cough. Respir. Med. 107, 408–412 (2013).
9.	
Koskela, H. O., Lätti, A. M. & Purokivi, M. K.  
Long-​term prognosis of chronic cough: a prospective, 
observational cohort study. BMC Pulm. Med. 17,  
146 (2017).
10.	 Gibson, P. et al. Treatment of unexplained chronic 
cough: CHEST guideline and expert panel report. 
Chest 149, 27–44 (2016).
11.	 Morice, A. H. et al. Expert opinion on the cough 
hypersensitivity syndrome in respiratory medicine.  
Eur. Respir. J. 44, 1132–1148 (2014).  
European Respiratory Society Task Force report 
detailing the adoption of cough hypersensitivity as 
a valid and useful concept by key opinion leaders, 
shaping the assessment, management and study  
of patients with chronic cough.
12.	 Mazzone, S. B. & McGarvey, L. Mechanisms  
and rationale for targeted therapies in refractory and 
unexplained chronic cough. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 
109, 619–636 (2021).  
A state-​of-the-​art overview of the major drug 
discovery pathways and clinical trials currently 
under investigation for the treatment of chronic 
cough.
13.	 Song, W. J. et al. The global epidemiology of chronic 
cough in adults: a systematic review and meta-​analysis. 
Eur. Respir. J. 45, 1479–1481 (2015).  
A comprehensive systematic literature review 
showing an estimated worldwide epidemiological 
burden (~10% prevalence) of chronic cough 
irrespective of diagnosis in adults.
14.	 Çolak, Y. et al. Risk factors for chronic cough among 
14,669 individuals from the general population.  
Chest 152, 563–573 (2017).
15.	 Liang, H. et al. Prevalence of chronic cough in China:  
a systematic review and meta-​analysis. BMC Pulm. Med. 
22, 62 (2022).
16.	 Arinze, J. T. et al. Prevalence and incidence of, and risk 
factors for chronic cough in the adult population: the 
Rotterdam study. ERJ Open Res. 6, 00300-2019 
(2020).
17.	 Satia, I. et al. Prevalence, incidence and characteristics 
of chronic cough among adults from the Canadian 
longitudinal study on aging. ERJ Open Res. 7,  
00160-2021 (2021).
18.	 Kang, S. Y. et al. Cough persistence in adults with 
chronic cough: a 4-year retrospective cohort study. 
Allergol. Int. 69, 588–593 (2020).
19.	 Singh, D., Arora, V. & Sobti, P. C. Chronic/recurrent 
cough in rural children in Ludhiana, Punjab. Indian 
Pediatrics 39, 23–29 (2002).
20.	 Flynn, M. G. Respiratory symptoms, bronchial 
responsiveness, and atopy in Fijian and Indian children. 
Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 150, 415–420 (1994).
21.	 O’Grady, K. F. et al. Chronic cough postacute 
respiratory illness in children: a cohort study.  
Arch. Dis. Child. 102, 1044–1048 (2017).
22.	 Chung, K. F. & Pavord, I. D. Prevalence, pathogenesis, 
and causes of chronic cough. Lancet 371, 1364–1374 
(2008).
23.	 McGovern, A. E., Short, K. R., Kywe Moe, A. A.  
& Mazzone, S. B. Translational review: neuroimmune 
mechanisms in cough and emerging therapeutic 
targets. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 142, 1392–1402 
(2018).
24.	 Morice, A. H. et al. A worldwide survey of chronic 
cough: a manifestation of enhanced somatosensory 
response. Eur. Respir. J. 44, 1149–1155 (2014).  
A survey of 11 specialist cough clinics assessing 
>10,000 adult patients with chronic cough, 
demonstrating an older (60–69 years) female 
preponderence with evidence of altered brain 
processing of cough stimuli in these patients.
25.	 Dicpinigaitis, P. V. & Rauf, K. The influence of gender 
on cough reflex sensitivity. Chest 113, 1319–1321 
(1998).
26.	 Varechova, S., Plevkova, J., Hanacek, J. & Tatar, M. 
Role of gender and pubertal stage on cough sensitivity 
	
 17
NATURE REVIEWS | DiSEASE PRimERS | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 
Primer
0123456789();: 
in childhood and adolescence. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 
59, 719–726 (2008).
27.	 Meltzer, E. O. et al. Prevalence and burden of chronic 
cough in the United States. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 
Pract. 9, 4037–4044.e4032 (2021).
28.	 Kang, M. G. et al. Point prevalence and 
epidemiological characteristics of chronic cough in the 
general adult population: the Korean National Health 
and Nutrition Examination Survey 2010–2012. 
Medicine 96, e6486 (2017).
29.	 Kantar, A. & Seminara, M. Why chronic cough in 
children is different. Pulm. Pharmacol. Ther. 56, 
51–55 (2019).
30.	 French, C. T., Fletcher, K. E. & Irwin, R. S. Gender 
differences in health-​related quality of life in patients 
complaining of chronic cough. Chest 125, 482–488 
(2004).
31.	 Chang, A. B. et al. Do sex and atopy influence cough 
outcome measurements in children? Chest 140,  
324–330 (2011).
32.	 Dicpinigaitis, P. V., Enilari, O. & Cleven, K. L. Prevalence 
of Arnold nerve reflex in subjects with and without 
chronic cough: relevance to cough hypersensitivity 
syndrome. Pulm. Pharmacol. Ther. 54, 22–24 (2019).  
Evidence of a generalized vagal nerve hypersensitivity 
in patients with chronic cough, consistent with 
mechanistic interactions between pulmonary and 
non-​pulmonary nerve fibres contributing to the 
sensitized state.
33.	 Lai, K. et al. Age and sex distribution of chinese 
chronic cough patients and their relationship with 
capsaicin cough sensitivity. Allergy Asthma Immunol. 
Res. 11, 871–884 (2019).
34.	 Smit, L. A. et al. Transient receptor potential genes, 
smoking, occupational exposures and cough in adults. 
Respir. Res. 13, 26 (2012).
35.	 Park, H. K. et al. Association of genetic variations in 
neurokinin-2 receptor with enhanced cough sensitivity 
to capsaicin in chronic cough. Thorax 61, 1070–1075 
(2006).
36.	 Cortese, A. et al. Cerebellar ataxia, neuropathy, 
vestibular areflexia syndrome due to RFC1 repeat 
expansion. Brain 143, 480–490 (2020).
37.	 Kumar, K. R. et al. RFC1 expansions can mimic 
hereditary sensory neuropathy with cough and Sjögren 
syndrome. Brain 143, e82 (2020).
38.	 Zemp, E. et al. Long-​term ambient air pollution and 
respiratory symptoms in adults (SAPALDIA study).  
The SAPALDIA Team. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 
159, 1257–1266 (1999).
39.	 Song, W. J. et al. Confronting COVID-19-associated 
cough and the post-​COVID syndrome: role of viral 
neurotropism, neuroinflammation, and neuroimmune 
responses. Lancet Respir. Med. 9, 533–544 (2021).  
Describing the acute and chronic cough of  
SARS-​CoV-2 infection and the potential underlying 
mechanisms.
40.	 Ryan, N. M., Vertigan, A. E., Ferguson, J., Wark, P.  
& Gibson, P. G. Clinical and physiological features of 
postinfectious chronic cough associated with H1N1 
infection. Respir. Med. 106, 138–144 (2012).
41.	 Lin, L. et al. The duration of cough in patients with 
H1N1 influenza. Clin. Respir. J. 11, 733–738 (2017).
42.	 Wang, K. et al. Symptomatic treatment of the cough in 
whooping cough. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2014, 
Cd003257 (2014).
43.	 Moore, A., Harnden, A., Grant, C. C., Patel, S. &  
Irwin, R. S. Clinically diagnosing pertussis-​associated 
cough in adults and children: CHEST guideline and 
expert panel report. Chest 155, 147–154 (2019).
44.	 Côté, A. et al. Managing chronic cough due to  
asthma and NAEB in adults and adolescents: CHEST 
guideline and expert panel report. Chest 158, 68–96 
(2020).  
Guidelines for managing cough in patients with 
asthma and non-​asmatic eosinophilic bronchitis.
45.	 Lai, K. et al. A prospective, multicenter survey on 
causes of chronic cough in China. Chest 143,  
613–620 (2013).
46.	 Morice, A. H. et al. The diagnosis and management of 
chronic cough. Eur. Respir. J. 24, 481–492 (2004).
47.	 Rennard, S. et al. Impact of COPD in North America 
and Europe in 2000: subjects’ perspective of 
confronting COPD international survey. Eur. Respir. J. 
20, 799–805 (2002).
48.	 Kessler, R. et al. Symptom variability in patients with 
severe COPD: a pan-​European cross-​sectional study. 
Eur. Respir. J. 37, 264–272 (2011).
49.	 McCallion, P. & De Soyza, A. Cough and bronchiectasis. 
Pulm. Pharmacol. Ther. 47, 77–83 (2017).
50.	 Harle, A. S., Blackhall, F. H., Smith, J. A. & 
Molassiotis, A. Understanding cough and its 
management in lung cancer. Curr. Opin. Support. 
Palliat. Care 6, 153–162 (2012).
51.	 Birring, S. S. et al. Treatment of interstitial lung 
disease associated cough: CHEST guideline and expert 
panel report. Chest 154, 904–917 (2018).
52.	 Chan, K. K. et al. Chronic cough in patients with sleep-​
disordered breathing. Eur. Respir. J. 35, 368–372 
(2010).
53.	 Dicpinigaitis, P. V. Angiotensin-​converting enzyme 
inhibitor-​induced cough: ACCP evidence-​based clinical 
practice guidelines. Chest 129, 169s–173s (2006).
54.	 Lai, K. et al. The spectrum, clinical features and 
diagnosis of chronic cough due to rare causes.  
J. Thorac. Dis. 13, 2575–2582 (2021).
55.	 Moscato, G. et al. EAACI position paper on assessment 
of cough in the workplace. Allergy 69, 292–304 (2014).
56.	 Gordon, S. B. et al. Glass bottle workers exposed  
to low-​dose irritant fumes cough but do not wheeze. 
Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 156, 206–210  
(1997).
57.	 Wiszniewska, M. et al. Characterization of occupational 
eosinophilic bronchitis in a multicenter cohort of 
subjects with work-​related asthma symptoms.  
J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. Pract. 9, 937–944.e934 
(2021).
58.	 Fang, Z. et al. Traffic-​related air pollution induces non-​
allergic eosinophilic airway inflammation and cough 
hypersensitivity in guinea-​pigs. Clin. Exp. Allergy 49, 
366–377 (2019).
59.	 Zhang, Q., Qiu, M., Lai, K. & Zhong, N. Cough and 
environmental air pollution in China. Pulm. Pharmacol. 
Ther. 35, 132–136 (2015).
60.	 Pan, G. et al. Air pollution and children’s respiratory 
symptoms in six cities of Northern China. Respir. Med. 
104, 1903–1911 (2010).
61.	 Jo, E. J. & Song, W. J. Environmental triggers for 
chronic cough. Asia Pac. Allergy 9, e16 (2019).
62.	 Hooper, L. G. et al. Ambient air pollution and chronic 
bronchitis in a cohort of U.S. women. Environ. Health 
Perspect. 126, 027005 (2018).
63.	 Schindler, C. et al. Improvements in PM10 exposure 
and reduced rates of respiratory symptoms in a cohort 
of Swiss adults (SAPALDIA). Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care 
Med. 179, 579–587 (2009).
64.	 Adner, M. et al. Back to the future: re-​establishing 
guinea pig in vivo asthma models. Clin. Sci. 134, 
1219–1242 (2020).
65.	 Mazzone, S. B. & Undem, B. J. Vagal afferent 
innervation of the airways in health and disease. 
Physiol. Rev. 96, 975–1024 (2016).  
A detailed review of the sensory nerve supply to 
the airways, including all known sensory fibre types, 
their physiological and pharmacological properties, 
wiring and alterations caused by disease.
66.	 Canning, B. J. et al. Identification of the tracheal  
and laryngeal afferent neurones mediating cough in 
anaesthetized guinea-​pigs. J. Physiol. 557, 543–558 
(2004).
67.	 Mazzone, S. B. et al. Selective expression of a sodium 
pump isozyme by cough receptors and evidence for  
its essential role in regulating cough. J. Neurosci. 29, 
13662–13671 (2009).
68.	 West, P. W., Canning, B. J., Merlo-​Pich, E.,  
Woodcock, A. A. & Smith, J. A. Morphologic 
characterization of nerves in whole-​mount airway 
biopsies. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 192, 30–39 
(2015).
69.	 Wang, J. et al. Distinct and common expression of 
receptors for inflammatory mediators in vagal nodose 
versus jugular capsaicin-​sensitive/TRPV1-positive 
neurons detected by low input RNA sequencing.  
PLoS ONE 12, e0185985 (2017).
70.	 Mazzone, S. B. et al. Transcriptional profiling of 
individual airway projecting vagal sensory neurons. 
Mol. Neurobiol. 57, 949–963 (2020).
71.	 Farrell, M. J. et al. Evidence for multiple bulbar and 
higher brain circuits processing sensory inputs from 
the respiratory system in humans. J. Physiol. 598, 
5771–5787 (2020).
72.	 Canning, B. J. & Mori, N. An essential component  
to brainstem cough gating identified in anesthetized 
guinea pigs. FASEB J. 24, 3916–3926 (2010).
73.	 McGovern, A. E. et al. Distinct brainstem and 
forebrain circuits receiving tracheal sensory neuron 
inputs revealed using a novel conditional anterograde 
transsynaptic viral tracing system. J. Neurosci. 35, 
7041–7055 (2015).
74.	 Driessen, A. K. et al. Reflex regulation of breathing by 
the paratrigeminal nucleus via multiple bulbar circuits. 
Brain Struct. Funct. 223, 4005–4022 (2018).
75.	 Driessen, A. K. et al. A role for neurokinin 1 receptor 
expressing neurons in the paratrigeminal nucleus in 
bradykinin-​evoked cough in guinea-​pigs. J. Physiol. 
598, 2257–2275 (2020).
76.	 Canning, B. J. & Mori, N. Encoding of the cough reflex 
in anesthetized guinea pigs. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. 
Integr. Comp. Physiol. 300, R369–R377 (2011).
77.	 Smith, J. A., Hilton, E. C. Y., Saulsberry, L.  
& Canning, B. J. Antitussive effects of memantine  
in guinea pigs. Chest 141, 996–1002 (2012).
78.	 Hewitt, M. M. et al. Pharmacology of bradykinin-​
evoked coughing in guinea pigs. J. Pharmacol.  
Exp. Ther. 357, 620–628 (2016).
79.	 Dicpinigaitis, P. V., Canning, B. J., Garner, R.  
& Paterson, B. Effect of memantine on cough reflex 
sensitivity: translational studies in guinea pigs and 
humans. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 352, 448–454 
(2015).
80.	 Smith, J. A. et al. Aprepitant for cough in lung cancer. 
a randomized placebo-​controlled trial and mechanistic 
insights. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 203, 737–745 
(2021).
81.	 Mazzone, S. B., Chung, K. F. & McGarvey, L. The 
heterogeneity of chronic cough: a case for endotypes 
of cough hypersensitivity. Lancet Respir. Med. 6, 
636–646 (2018).
82.	 Fox, A. J. et al. Bradykinin-​evoked sensitization of 
airway sensory nerves: a mechanism for ACE-​inhibitor 
cough. Nat. Med. 2, 814–817 (1996).
83.	 Fischer, A., McGregor, G. P., Saria, A., Philippin, B.  
& Kummer, W. Induction of tachykinin gene and 
peptide expression in guinea pig nodose primary 
afferent neurons by allergic airway inflammation.  
J. Clin. Invest. 98, 2284–2291 (1996).
84.	 Shapiro, C. O. et al. Airway sensory nerve density  
is increased in chronic cough. Am. J. Respir. Crit.  
Care Med. 203, 348–355 (2021).
85.	 Groneberg, D. A. et al. Increased expression of 
transient receptor potential vanilloid-1 in airway 
nerves of chronic cough. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 
170, 1276–1280 (2004).
86.	 Abubakar, A. B., Bautista, T. G., Dimmock, M. R., 
Mazzone, S. B. & Farrell, M. J. Behavioral and regional 
brain responses to inhalation of capsaicin modified  
by painful conditioning in humans. Chest 159,  
1136–1146 (2021).
87.	 Koivisto, A. P., Belvisi, M. G., Gaudet, R. & Szallasi, A. 
Advances in TRP channel drug discovery: from target 
validation to clinical studies. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 
21, 41–59 (2022).
88.	 Verzele, N. A. J. et al. The impact of influenza 
pulmonary infection and inflammation on vagal 
bronchopulmonary sensory neurons. FASEB J. 35, 
e21320 (2021).
89.	 Kaelberer, M. M., Caceres, A. I. & Jordt, S. E. 
Activation of a nerve injury transcriptional signature  
in airway-​innervating sensory neurons after 
lipopolysaccharide-​induced lung inflammation.  
Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol. 318, 
L953–L964 (2020).
90.	 Mazzone, S. B. et al. Modulation of vagal sensory 
neurons via high mobility group box-1 and receptor 
for advanced glycation end products: implications  
for respiratory viral infections. Front. Physiol. 12, 
744812 (2021).
91.	 Yang, H. et al. HMGB1 released from nociceptors 
mediates inflammation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
118, e2102034118 (2021).
92.	 Chung, K. F., McGarvey, L. & Mazzone, S. B. Chronic 
cough as a neuropathic disorder. Lancet Respir. Med. 
1, 414–422 (2013).  
Establishing the clinical and mechanistic bases  
for considering chronic cough as a cough 
hypersensitivity syndrome with neuropathic 
features.
93.	 Mahadi, K. M., Lall, V. K., Deuchars, S. A. & Deuchars, J. 
Cardiovascular autonomic effects of transcutaneous 
auricular nerve stimulation via the tragus in the rat 
involve spinal cervical sensory afferent pathways. 
Brain Stim. 12, 1151–1158 (2019).
94.	 Mazzone, S. B., Mori, N. & Canning, B. J. Synergistic 
interactions between airway afferent nerve subtypes 
regulating the cough reflex in guinea-​pigs. J. Physiol. 
569, 559–573 (2005).
95.	 Plevkova, J. et al. The role of trigeminal nasal TRPM8-
expressing afferent neurons in the antitussive effects 
of menthol. J. Appl. Physiol. 115, 268–274 (2013).
96.	 Chou, Y. L., Mori, N. & Canning, B. J. Opposing effects 
of bronchopulmonary C-​fiber subtypes on cough in 
guinea pigs. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. 
Physiol. 314, R489–R498 (2018).
97.	 Spaziano, G. et al. Exposure to allergen causes 
changes in NTS neural activities after intratracheal 
capsaicin application, in endocannabinoid levels and 
18 | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 	
www.nature.com/nrdp
Primer
0123456789();: 
in the glia morphology of NTS. BioMed. Res. Int. 
2015, 980983 (2015).
98.	 Chen, C. Y. et al. Extended allergen exposure in 
asthmatic monkeys induces neuroplasticity in nucleus 
tractus solitarius. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 108,  
557–562 (2001).
99.	 Sekizawa, S. et al. Extended secondhand tobacco 
smoke exposure induces plasticity in nucleus tractus 
solitarius second-​order lung afferent neurons in young 
guinea pigs. Eur. J. Neurosci. 28, 771–781 (2008).
100.	Chen, Z. et al. Glial activation and inflammation in the 
NTS in a rat model after exposure to diesel exhaust 
particles. Env. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 83, 103584 
(2021).
101.	Ando, A. et al. Neural correlates of cough 
hypersensitivity in humans: evidence for central 
sensitisation and dysfunctional inhibitory control. 
Thorax 71, 323–329 (2016).
102.	Chen, Z. et al. A descending pathway emanating from 
the periaqueductal gray mediates the development  
of cough-​like hypersensitivity. iScience 25, 103641 
(2022).
103.	Zambreanu, L., Wise, R. G., Brooks, J. C. W.,  
Iannetti, G. D. & Tracey, I. A role for the brainstem  
in central sensitisation in humans. Evidence from 
functional magnetic resonance imaging. Pain 114, 
397–407 (2005).
104.	Leech, J., Mazzone, S. B. & Farrell, M. J. The effect  
of placebo conditioning on capsaicin-​evoked urge to 
cough. Chest 142, 951–957 (2012).
105.	Leech, J., Mazzone, S. B. & Farrell, M. J. Brain activity 
associated with placebo suppression of the urge-​
to-cough in humans. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 
188, 1069–1075 (2013).
106.	McGovern, A. E., Ajayi, I. E., Farrell, M. J.  
& Mazzone, S. B. A neuroanatomical framework  
for the central modulation of respiratory sensory 
processing and cough by the periaqueductal grey.  
J. Thorac. Dis. 9, 4098–4107 (2017).
107.	Mazzone, S. B., Cole, L. J., Ando, A., Egan, G. F.  
& Farrell, M. J. Investigation of the neural control  
of cough and cough suppression in humans using 
functional brain imaging. J. Neurosci. 31, 2948–2958 
(2011).
108.	Simonyan, K., Saad, Z. S., Loucks, T. M., Poletto, C. J. 
& Ludlow, C. L. Functional neuroanatomy of human 
voluntary cough and sniff production. NeuroImage 37, 
401–409 (2007).
109.	Vertigan, A. E. et al. Somatic cough syndrome 
(previously referred to as psychogenic cough) and tic 
cough (previously referred to as habit cough) in adults 
and children: CHEST Guideline and Expert Panel 
Report. Chest 148, 24–31 (2015).
110.	 Mazzone, S. B. Chronic cough: a disorder of response 
inhibition? Eur. Respir. J. 53, 1900254 (2019).
111.	 Farrell, M. J. et al. Functionally connected brain 
regions in the network activated during capsaicin 
inhalation. Hum. Brain Mapp. 35, 5341–5355 
(2014).
112.	Cho, P. S. P. et al. Cough hypersensitivity and 
suppression in COPD. Eur. Respir. J. 57, 2003569 
(2021).  
Evidence that voluntary cough suppression defines 
distinct cough endotypes: patients with refractory 
chronic cough fail volitional cough suppression 
tests while patients with chronic cough 
accompanying COPD do not.
113.	Cho, P. S. P., Fletcher, H. V., Turner, R. D., Jolley, C. J. 
& Birring, S. S. Impaired cough suppression in chronic 
refractory cough. Eur. Respir. J. 53, 2003569 (2019).
114.	Hilton, E. et al. The effect of pain conditioning on 
experimentally evoked cough: evidence of impaired 
endogenous inhibitory control mechanisms in refractory 
chronic cough. Eur. Respir. J. https://doi.org/10.1183/ 
13993003.01387-2020 (2020).
115.	Badri, H. et al. A double-​blind randomised placebo-​
controlled trial investigating the effects of lesogaberan 
on the objective cough frequency and capsaicin-​
evoked coughs in patients with refractory chronic 
cough. ERJ Open Res. 8, 00546-2021 (2022).
116.	Dicpinigaitis, P. V. & Rauf, K. Treatment of chronic, 
refractory cough with baclofen. Respiration 65, 
86–88 (1998).
117.	Xie, J. et al. Cough in hypereosinophilic syndrome: 
case report and literature review. BMC Pulm. Med. 
20, 90 (2020).
118.	Chung, K. F. et al. Cough and hypereosinophilia due  
to FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion gene with tyrosine kinase 
activity. Eur. Respir. J. 27, 230–232 (2006).
119.	Belafsky, P. C., Postma, G. N. & Koufman, J. A. Validity 
and reliability of the reflux symptom index (RSI).  
J. Voice 16, 274–277 (2002).
120.	Morice, A. H., Faruqi, S., Wright, C. E., Thompson, R. 
& Bland, J. M. Cough hypersensitivity syndrome:  
a distinct clinical entity. Lung 189, 73–79 (2011).
121.	Trinick, R., Johnston, N., Dalzell, A. M.  
& McNamara, P. S. Reflux aspiration in children with 
neurodisability–a significant problem, but can we 
measure it? J. Pediatr. Surg. 47, 291–298 (2012).
122.	Grabowski, M. et al. Pepsin and bile acids in induced 
sputum of chronic cough patients. Respir. Med. 105, 
1257–1261 (2011).
123.	Stovold, R. et al. Pepsin, a biomarker of gastric 
aspiration in lung allografts: a putative association 
with rejection. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 175, 
1298–1303 (2007).
124.	Decalmer, S. et al. Chronic cough: relationship 
between microaspiration, gastroesophageal reflux, 
and cough frequency. Chest 142, 958–964 (2012).
125.	Irwin, R. S., Corrao, W. M. & Pratter, M. R. Chronic 
persistent cough in the adult: the spectrum and 
frequency of causes and successful outcome of  
specific therapy. Am. Rev. Respir. Dis. 123, 413–417 
(1981).
126.	Hennel, M., Brozmanova, M. & Kollarik, M. Cough 
reflex sensitization from esophagus and nose.  
Pulm. Pharmacol. Ther. 35, 117–121 (2015).
127.	Houghton, L. A., Lee, A. S., Badri, H., DeVault, K. R.  
& Smith, J. A. Respiratory disease and the oesophagus: 
reflux, reflexes and microaspiration. Nat. Rev. 
Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 13, 445–460 (2016).
128.	Plevkova, J. et al. Convergence of nasal and tracheal 
neural pathways in modulating the cough response  
in guinea pigs. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 60, 89–93 
(2009).
129.	Javorkova, N. et al. Acidification of the oesophagus 
acutely increases the cough sensitivity in patients  
with gastro-​oesophageal reflux and chronic cough. 
Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 20, 119–124 (2008).
130.	Ing, A. J., Ngu, M. C. & Breslin, A. B. Pathogenesis  
of chronic persistent cough associated with 
gastroesophageal reflux. Am. J. Respir. Crit.  
Care Med. 149, 160–167 (1994).
131.	Plevkova, J., Brozmanova, M., Pecova, R. & Tatar, M. 
Effects of intranasal capsaicin challenge on cough 
reflex in healthy human volunteers. J. Physiol. 
Pharmacol. 55, 101–106 (2004).
132.	Smith, J. A. et al. Acoustic cough–reflux associations 
in chronic cough: potential triggers and mechanisms. 
Gastroenterology 139, 754–762 (2010).
133.	Sifrim, D. et al. Weakly acidic reflux in patients with 
chronic unexplained cough during 24 hour pressure, 
pH, and impedance monitoring. Gut 54, 449–454 
(2005).
134.	Blondeau, K., Dupont, L. J., Mertens, V., Tack, J.  
& Sifrim, D. Improved diagnosis of gastro-​oesophageal 
reflux in patients with unexplained chronic cough. 
Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 25, 723–732 (2007).
135.	Smith, J. A., Ashurst, H. L., Jack, S., Woodcock, A. A. 
& Earis, J. E. The description of cough sounds by 
healthcare professionals. Cough 2, 1 (2006).
136.	Lee, K. K. et al. Sound: a non-​invasive measure of 
cough intensity. BMJ Open. Respir. Res. 4, e000178 
(2017).
137.	Won, H. K. et al. Cough-​related laryngeal sensations 
and triggers in adults with chronic cough: symptom 
profile and impact. Allergy Asthma Immunol. Res. 11, 
622–631 (2019).
138.	Vertigan, A. E. & Gibson, P. G. Chronic refractory 
cough as a sensory neuropathy: evidence from a 
reinterpretation of cough triggers. J. Voice 25,  
596–601 (2011).
139.	Sundar, K. M., Stark, A. C., Hu, N. & Barkmeier-​
Kraemer, J. Is laryngeal hypersensitivity the basis of 
unexplained or refractory chronic cough? ERJ Open 
Res. 7, 00793-2020 (2021).
140.	Irwin, R. S., French, C. L., Chang, A. B. & Altman, K. W. 
Classification of cough as a symptom in adults and 
management algorithms: CHEST guideline and expert 
panel report. Chest 153, 196–209 (2018).  
Latest management guidelines on chronic cough, 
headed by Dr Irwin, who was the first to advocate 
an anatomico-​physiological approach to 
understanding the causes of cough.
141.	Kahrilas, P. J. et al. Chronic cough due to 
gastroesophageal reflux in adults: CHEST guideline 
and expert panel report. Chest 150, 1341–1360 
(2016).
142.	Chang, A. B. et al. Children with chronic cough:  
when is watchful waiting appropriate? development  
of likelihood ratios for assessing children with chronic 
cough. Chest 147, 745–753 (2015).
143.	Chang, A. B., Oppenheimer, J. J. & Irwin, R. S. 
Managing chronic cough as a symptom in children and 
management algorithms: CHEST guideline and expert 
panel report. Chest 158, 303–329 (2020).  
The most current consensus guidelines for cough 
management in children.
144.	O’Grady, K. F. et al. Effectiveness of a chronic cough 
management algorithm at the transitional stage  
from acute to chronic cough in children: a multicenter, 
nested, single-​blind, randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet Child. Adolesc. Health 3, 889–898 (2019).
145.	Chang, A. B. et al. Use of management pathways or 
algorithms in children with chronic cough: systematic 
reviews. Chest 149, 106–119 (2016).
146.	Birring, S. S. et al. Cough frequency, cough sensitivity 
and health status in patients with chronic cough. 
Respir. Med. 100, 1105–1109 (2006).
147.	Lee, K. K. et al. A longitudinal assessment of acute 
cough. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 187, 991–997 
(2013).
148.	Morice, A. H. et al. The effect of gefapixant, a P2X3 
antagonist, on cough reflex sensitivity: a randomised 
placebo-​controlled study. Eur. Respir. J. 54, 1900439 
(2019).
149.	Belvisi, M. G. et al. XEN-​D0501, a novel transient 
receptor potential vanilloid 1 antagonist, does not 
reduce cough in patients with refractory cough. Am. J. 
Respir. Crit. Care Med. 196, 1255–1263 (2017).
150.	Prudon, B. et al. Cough and glottic-​stop reflex 
sensitivity in health and disease. Chest 127, 550–557 
(2005).
151.	Koskela, H. O., Nurmi, H. M. & Birring, S. S. Utility  
of cough provocation tests in chronic cough and 
respiratory diseases: a comprehensive review and 
introduction of new reference ranges for the capsaicin 
test. Allergy Asthma Immunol. Res. 13, 833–849 
(2021).
152.	Chang, A. B. et al. Etiologies of chronic cough in 
pediatric cohorts: CHEST guideline and expert panel 
report. Chest 152, 607–617 (2017).
153.	Kahrilas, P. J., Howden, C. W., Hughes, N.  
& Molloy-​Bland, M. Response of chronic cough  
to acid-​suppressive therapy in patients with 
gastroesophageal reflux disease. Chest 143,  
605–612 (2013).
154.	Badri, H. et al. Heartburn as a marker of the success 
of acid suppression therapy in chronic cough. Lung 
199, 597–602 (2021).
155.	Yousaf, N. et al. Long-​term low-​dose erythromycin in 
patients with unexplained chronic cough: a double-​
blind placebo controlled trial. Thorax 65, 1107–1110 
(2010).
156.	Hodgson, D. et al. The effects of azithromycin in 
treatment-​resistant cough: a randomized, double-​blind, 
placebo-​controlled trial. Chest 149, 1052–1060 
(2016).
157.	Chang, A. B. et al. Chronic cough and gastroesophageal 
reflux in children: CHEST guideline and expert panel 
report. Chest 156, 131–140 (2019).  
Although GERD is considered a major cause of 
chronic cough in adults, the role of GERD in chronic 
cough in children is controversial, as detailed in this 
state-​of-the-​art consensus paper.
158.	Vandenplas, Y. et al. Pediatric gastroesophageal reflux 
clinical practice guidelines: joint recommendations  
of the North American Society for Pediatric 
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition 
(NASPGHAN) and the European Society for Pediatric 
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition 
(ESPGHAN). J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 49,  
498–547 (2009).
159.	Prasad, S., Fong, E. & Ooi, E. H. Systematic review of 
patient-​reported outcomes after revision endoscopic 
sinus surgery. Am. J. Rhinol. Allergy 31, 248–255 
(2017).
160.	Chester, A. C. & Sindwani, R. Symptom outcomes  
in endoscopic sinus surgery: a systematic review  
of measurement methods. Laryngoscope 117,  
2239–2243 (2007).
161.	Lee, J. H. et al. Efficacy of non-​sedating H1-receptor 
antihistamines in adults and adolescents with chronic 
cough: a systematic review. World Allergy Organ. J. 
14, 100568 (2021).
162.	Zhang, J. et al. Risk factors for chronic cough in adults: 
a systematic review and meta-​analysis. Respirol 27, 
36–47 (2022).
163.	[No authors listed] Definition and classification of 
chronic bronchitis for clinical and epidemiological 
purposes. A report to the Medical Research Council by 
their committee on the aetiology of chronic bronchitis. 
Lancet 1, 775–779 (1965).
164.	Vestbo, J., Prescott, E. & Lange, P. Association of 
chronic mucus hypersecretion with FEV1 decline and 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease morbidity. 
	
 19
NATURE REVIEWS | DiSEASE PRimERS | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 
Primer
0123456789();: 
Copenhagen City Heart Study Group. Am. J. Respir. 
Crit. Care Med. 153, 1530–1535 (1996).
165.	Burgel, P. R. et al. Cough and sputum production  
are associated with frequent exacerbations and 
hospitalizations in COPD subjects. Chest 135,  
975–982 (2009).
166.	Singh, D. et al. Global strategy for the diagnosis, 
management, and prevention of chronic obstructive 
lung disease: the GOLD science committee report 
2019. Eur. Respir. J. 53, 1900164 (2019).
167.	Polley, L. et al. Impact of cough across different 
chronic respiratory diseases: comparison of two 
cough-​specific health-​related quality of life 
questionnaires. Chest 134, 295–302 (2008).
168.	Torrego, A. et al. Capsaicin cough sensitivity in 
bronchiectasis. Thorax 61, 706–709 (2006).
169.	Bolser, D. C. Mechanisms of action of central and 
peripheral antitussive drugs. Pulm. Pharm. 9,  
357–364 (1996).
170.	Takahama, K. & Shirasaki, T. Central and peripheral 
mechanisms of narcotic antitussives: codeine-​sensitive 
and -resistant coughs. Cough 3, 8 (2007).
171.	Fuller, R. W., Karlsson, J.-A., Choudry, N. B.  
& Pride, N. B. Effect of inhaled and systemic opiates 
on responses to inhaled capsaicin in humans. J. Appl. 
Physiol. 65, 1125–1130 (1988).
172.	Sevelius, H., McCoy, J. F. & Colmore, J. P. Dose 
response to codeine in patients with chronic cough. 
Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 12, 449–455 (1971).
173.	Aylward, M., Maddock, J., Davies, D. E., Protheroe, D. A. 
& Leideman, T. Dextromethorphan and codeine: 
comparison of plasma kinetics and antitussive effects. 
Eur. J. Respir. Dis. 65, 283–291 (1984).
174.	Freestone, C. & Eccles, R. Assessment of the antitussive 
efficacy of codeine in cough associated with common 
cold. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 49, 1045–1049 (1997).
175.	Smith, J., Owen, E., Earis, J. & Woodcock, A. Effect of 
codeine on objective measurement of cough in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. J. Allergy Clin. 
Immunol. 117, 831–835 (2006).
176.	Foley, M., Deluca, P. & Kimergård, A. Time to review 
the provision of addiction treatment for codeine 
dependence. BMJ 359, j5311 (2017).
177.	Sproule, B. A., Busto, U. E., Somer, G., Romach, M. K. 
& Sellers, E. M. Characteristics of dependent and 
nondependent regular users of codeine. J. Clin. 
Psychopharmacol. 19, 367–372 (1999).
178.	Ćelić, I. et al. Resolving issues about efficacy and 
safety of low-​dose codeine in combination analgesic 
drugs: a systematic review. Pain. Ther. 9, 171–194 
(2020).
179.	Morice, A. H. et al. Opiate therapy in chronic cough. 
Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 175, 312–315 (2007).
180.	Walsh, T. D. Prevention of opioid side effects. J. Pain. 
Symptom Manag. 5, 362–367 (1990).
181.	Kimos, P. et al. Analgesic action of gabapentin on 
chronic pain in the masticatory muscles: a randomized 
controlled trial. Pain 127, 151–160 (2007).
182.	Hendrich, J. et al. Pharmacological disruption  
of calcium channel trafficking by the alpha2delta 
ligand gabapentin. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 
3628–3633 (2008).
183.	Ryan, N. M., Birring, S. S. & Gibson, P. G. Gabapentin 
for refractory chronic cough: a randomised, double-​
blind, placebo-​controlled trial. Lancet 380,  
1583–1589 (2012).  
One of the first randomized, double-​blind and 
placebo-​controlled trials using cough counts, QOL 
scores and cough symptom scores that established 
the benefit of gabapentin as a potential anti-​tussive.
184.	Vertigan, A. E. et al. Pregabalin and speech pathology 
combination therapy for refractory chronic cough:  
a randomized controlled trial. Chest 149, 639–648 
(2016).
185.	Hamon, M. & Blier, P. Monoamine neurocircuitry in 
depression and strategies for new treatments. Prog. 
Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 45, 54–63 
(2013).
186.	Jeyakumar, A., Brickman, T. M. & Haben, M. 
Effectiveness of amitriptyline versus cough 
suppressants in the treatment of chronic cough 
resulting from postviral vagal neuropathy. 
Laryngoscope 116, 2108–2112 (2006).
187.	Ryan, M. A. & Cohen, S. M. Long-​term follow-​up  
of amitriptyline treatment for idiopathic cough. 
Laryngoscope 126, 2758–2763 (2016).
188.	Olsen, W. L. et al. Intra-​arterial, but not intrathecal, 
baclofen and codeine attenuates cough in the cat. 
Front. Physiol. 12, 640682 (2021).
189.	Simera, M., Poliacek, I. & Jakus, J. Central antitussive 
effect of codeine in the anesthetized rabbit. Eur. J. 
Med. Res. 15, 184–188 (2010).
190.	Fuller, R. W., Karlsson, J. A., Choudry, N. B.  
& Pride, N. B. Effect of inhaled and systemic opiates 
on responses to inhaled capsaicin in humans. J. Appl. 
Physiol. 65, 1125–1130 (1988).
191.	Badri, H. et al. Effect of centrally and peripherally 
acting GABA(B) agonism on the healthy human cough 
reflex. Pulm. Pharmacol. Ther. 71, 102079 (2021).
192.	Poliacek, I., Wang, C., Corrie, L. W., Rose, M. J.  
& Bolser, D. C. Microinjection of codeine into the 
region of the caudal ventral respiratory column 
suppresses cough in anesthetized cats. J. Appl. 
Physiol. 108, 858–865 (2010).
193.	Bolser, D. C., Hey, J. A. & Chapman, R. W. Influence  
of central antitussive drugs on the cough motor 
pattern. J. Appl. Physiol. 86, 1017–1024 (1999).
194.	Dickinson, R. S., Morjaria, J. B., Wright, C. E.  
& Morice, A. H. Is opiate action in cough due to 
sedation? Ther. Adv. Chronic Dis. 5, 200–205 (2014).
195.	Nicolakis, J., Gmeiner, G., Reiter, C.  
& Seltenhammer, M. H. Aspiration in lethal  
drug abuse-​a consequence of opioid intoxication.  
Int. J. Leg. Med. 134,  
2121–2132 (2020).
196.	Hårdemark Cedborg, A. I. et al. Effects of morphine 
and midazolam on pharyngeal function, airway 
protection, and coordination of breathing and 
swallowing in healthy adults. Anesthesiology 122, 
1253–1267 (2015).
197.	Ebihara, S., Sekiya, H., Miyagi, M., Ebihara, T.  
& Okazaki, T. Dysphagia, dystussia, and aspiration 
pneumonia in elderly people. J. Thorac. Dis. 8,  
632–639 (2016).
198.	Ebihara, S. & Ebihara, T. Cough in the elderly:  
a novel strategy for preventing aspiration pneumonia. 
Pulm. Pharmacol. Ther. 24, 318–323 (2011).
199.	Vertigan, A. E., Haines, J. & Slovarp, L. An update on 
speech pathology management of chronic refractory 
cough. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. Pract. 7, 1756–1761 
(2019).
200.	Vertigan, A. E., Theodoros, D. G., Gibson, P. G.  
& Winkworth, A. L. Efficacy of speech pathology 
management for chronic cough: a randomised placebo 
controlled trial of treatment efficacy. Thorax 61, 
1065–1069 (2006).
201.	Chamberlain Mitchell, S. A. et al. Physiotherapy,  
and speech and language therapy intervention for 
patients with refractory chronic cough: a multicentre 
randomised control trial. Thorax 72, 129–136 
(2017).
202.	Ryan, N. M., Vertigan, A. E. & Gibson, P. G. Chronic 
cough and laryngeal dysfunction improve with specific 
treatment of cough and paradoxical vocal fold 
movement. Cough 5, 4 (2009).
203.	Brignall, K., Jayaraman, B. & Birring, S. S. Quality  
of life and psychosocial aspects of cough. Lung 186, 
S55–S58 (2008).
204.	Dicpinigaitis, P. V. Prevalence of stress urinary 
incontinence in women presenting for evaluation  
of chronic cough. ERJ Open. Res. 7, 00012-2021 
(2021).
205.	Newcombe, P. A. et al. A child chronic cough-​specific 
quality of life measure: development and validation. 
Thorax 71, 695–700 (2016).
206.	Newcombe, P. A., Sheffield, J. K. & Chang, A. B.  
Parent cough-​specific quality of life: development and 
validation of a short form. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 
131, 1069–1074 (2013).
207.	Vernon, M., Kline Leidy, N., Nacson, A. & Nelsen, L. 
Measuring cough severity: development and pilot 
testing of a new seven-​item cough severity patient-​
reported outcome measure. Ther. Adv. Respir. Dis. 4, 
199–208 (2010).
208.	Irwin, R. S., Dudiki, N. & French, C. L. Life-​threatening 
and non-​life-threatening complications associated with 
coughing: a scoping review. Chest 158, 2058–2073 
(2020).
209.	French, C. L., Irwin, R. S., Curley, F. J. &  
Krikorian, C. J. Impact of chronic cough on quality  
of life. Arch. Intern. Med. 158, 1657–1661 (1998).
210.	French, C. T., Irwin, R. S., Fletcher, K. E. & Adams, T. M. 
Evaluation of a cough-​specific quality-​of-life 
questionnaire. Chest 121, 1123–1131 (2002).
211.	 Birring, S. S. et al. Development of a symptom specific 
health status measure for patients with chronic cough: 
leicester cough questionnaire (LCQ). Thorax 58,  
339–343 (2003).  
Development of a validated cough QOL 
questionnaire that is now routinely used for  
chronic cough investigations.
212.	Raj, A. A., Pavord, D. I. & Birring, S. S. in Pharmacology 
and Therapeutics of Cough (eds Kian, F. C. & John, W.) 
311–320 (Springer, 2009).
213.	McGarvey, L. P. et al. Efficacy and safety of gefapixant, 
a P2X 3 receptor antagonist, in refractory chronic 
cough and unexplained chronic cough (COUGH-1  
and COUGH-2): results from two double-​blind, 
randomised, parallel-​group, placebo-​controlled,  
phase 3 trials. Lancet 399, 909–923 (2022).  
Reported outcomes of two phase III trials of  
a P2X3 receptor antagonist, gefapixant, 
demonstrating its efficacy in refractory chronic 
cough and paving the way for the further 
development of P2X3 receptor antagonists  
for the treatment of chronic cough.
214.	Fletcher, K. E., French, C. T., Irwin, R. S., Corapi, K. M. 
& Norman, G. R. A prospective global measure, the 
Punum Ladder, provides more valid assessments of 
quality of life than a retrospective transition measure. 
J. Clin. Epidemiol. 63, 1123–1131 (2010).
215.	Anderson-​James, S., Newcombe, P. A., Marchant, J. M., 
Turner, C. T. & Chang, A. B. Children’s acute cough-​
specific quality of life: revalidation and development  
of a short form. Lung 199, 527–534 (2021).
216.	Marchant, J. M. et al. What is the burden of chronic 
cough for families? Chest 134, 303–309 (2008).
217.	McGarvey, L. & Gibson, P. G. What is chronic cough? 
Terminology. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. Pract. 7,  
1711–1714 (2019).
218.	Hall, J. I., Lozano, M., Estrada-​Petrocelli, L., Birring, S. 
& Turner, R. The present and future of cough counting 
tools. J. Thorac. Dis. 12, 5207–5223 (2020).
219.	Tochitsky, I. et al. Inhibition of inflammatory pain and 
cough by a novel charged sodium channel blocker.  
Br. J. Pharmacol. 178, 3905–3923 (2021).
220.	Carter, E. R., Debley, J. S. & Redding, G. R. Chronic 
productive cough in school children: prevalence and 
associations with asthma and environmental tobacco 
smoke exposure. Cough 2, 11 (2006).
221.	Faniran, A. O., Peat, J. K. & Woolcock, A. J. Measuring 
persistent cough in children in epidemiological studies: 
development of a questionnaire and assessment of 
prevalence in two countries. Chest 115, 434–439 
(1999).
222.	Migliore, E. et al. Respiratory symptoms in children 
living near busy roads and their relationship to 
vehicular traffic: results of an Italian multicenter  
study (SIDRIA 2). Env. Health 8, 27 (2009).
223.	Laird, P., Totterdell, J., Walker, R., Chang, A. B.  
& Schultz, A. Prevalence of chronic wet cough and 
protracted bacterial bronchitis in Aboriginal children. 
ERJ Open Res. 5, 00248-2019 (2019).
224.	Rylance, S. et al. Lung health and exposure to air 
pollution in Malawian children (CAPS): a cross-​
sectional study. Thorax 74, 1070–1077 (2019).
225.	Stein, R. T. et al. Influence of parental smoking on 
respiratory symptoms during the first decade of life: 
the Tucson children’s respiratory study. Am. J. Epidemiol. 
149, 1030–1037 (1999).
226.	Ryan, N. M., Gibson, P. G. & Birring, S. S. Arnold’s 
nerve cough reflex: evidence for chronic cough as a 
sensory vagal neuropathy. J. Thorac. Dis. 6, 
S748–S752 (2014).
227.	Stec, S. M. et al. Diagnosis and management of 
premature ventricular complexes-​associated chronic 
cough. Chest 135, 1535–1541 (2009).
228.	Kok, C. et al. A locus for hereditary sensory 
neuropathy with cough and gastroesophageal reflux 
on chromosome 3p22-p24. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 73, 
632–637 (2003).
229.	Molassiotis, A., Smith, J. A., Mazzone, P., Blackhall, F. 
& Irwin, R. S. Symptomatic treatment of cough among 
adult patients with lung cancer: CHEST guideline and 
expert panel report. Chest 151, 861–874 (2017).
230.	Jeon, K. et al. Clinical features of recently diagnosed 
pulmonary paragonimiasis in Korea. Chest 128, 
1423–1430 (2005).
231.	Agossou, M. et al. Mammomonogamus laryngeus:  
an unusual cause of acute and chronic cough in the 
Caribbean area. ERJ Open Res. 7, 00814-2020 
(2021).
232.	McGarvey, L. The difficult-​to-treat, therapy-​resistant 
cough: why are current cough treatments not working 
and what can we do? Pulm. Pharmacol. Ther. 26, 
528–531 (2013).
233.	Lee, K. K. et al. Global physiology and pathophysiology 
of cough: part 1: cough phenomenology–CHEST 
guideline and expert panel report. Chest 159,  
282–293 (2021).
234.	Shannon, R. et al. Production of reflex cough by 
brainstem respiratory networks. Pulm. Pharmacol. 
Ther. 17, 369–376 (2004).
235.	Hegland, K. W., Bolser, D. C. & Davenport, P. W. 
Volitional control of reflex cough. J. Appl. Physiol. 
113, 39–46 (2012).
20 | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 	
www.nature.com/nrdp
Primer
0123456789();: 
236.	Hutchings, H. A., Morris, S., Eccles, R. & Jawad, M. S. 
Voluntary suppression of cough induced by inhalation 
of capsaicin in healthy volunteers. Respir. Med. 87, 
379–382 (1993).
237.	Davenport, P. W. Urge-​to-cough: what can it teach us 
about cough? Lung 186, S107–S111 (2008).
238.	Marsden, P. A. et al. Objective cough frequency, 
airway inflammation, and disease control in asthma. 
Chest 149, 1460–1466 (2016).
239.	Satia, I. et al. The interaction between 
bronchoconstriction and cough in asthma.  
Thorax 72, 1144–1146 (2017).
240.	Satia, I. et al. Capsaicin-​evoked cough responses  
in asthmatic patients: evidence for airway  
neuronal dysfunction. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol.  
139, 771–779.e710 (2017).
241.	Choudry, N. B., Fuller, R. W., Anderson, N.  
& Karlsson, J. A. Separation of cough and reflex 
bronchoconstriction by inhaled local anaesthetics.  
Eur. Respir. J. 3, 579–583 (1990).
242.	Fujimura, M., Sakamoto, S., Kamio, Y. & Matsuda, T. 
Effects of methacholine induced bronchoconstriction 
and procaterol induced bronchodilation on cough 
receptor sensitivity to inhaled capsaicin and tartaric 
acid. Thorax 47, 441–445 (1992).
243.	Hilton, E. C., Baverel, P. G., Woodcock, A.,  
Van Der Graaf, P. H. & Smith, J. A. Pharmacodynamic 
modeling of cough responses to capsaicin inhalation 
calls into question the utility of the C5 end point.  
J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 132, 847–855.e1–5 (2013).
244.	Drake, M. G. et al. Eosinophils increase airway  
sensory nerve density in mice and in human asthma. 
Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaar8477 (2018).
245.	Gao, J., Wu, F., Wu, S. & Yang, X. Inflammatory 
subtypes in classic asthma and cough variant asthma. 
J. Inflamm. Res. 13, 1167–1173 (2020).
246.	Gao, J., Wu, H. G. & Wu, F. Small airways dysfunction 
and bronchial hyper-​responsiveness in cough variant 
asthma. Int. J. Gen. Med. 13, 1427–1434 (2020).
247.	Gibson, P. G., Dolovich, J., Denburg, J., Ramsdale, E. H. 
& Hargreave, F. E. Chronic cough: eosinophilic 
bronchitis without asthma. Lancet 1, 1346–1348 
(1989).
248.	Brightling, C. E. et al. Mast-​cell infiltration of airway 
smooth muscle in asthma. N. Engl. J. Med. 346, 
1699–1705 (2002).
249.	Brightling, C. E. et al. Induced sputum inflammatory 
mediator concentrations in eosinophilic bronchitis and 
asthma. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 162, 878–882 
(2000).
250.	Vertigan, A. E., Bone, S. L. & Gibson, P. G. Laryngeal 
sensory dysfunction in laryngeal hypersensitivity 
syndrome. Respirology 18, 948–956 (2013). 
Establishing laryngeal dysfunction or hypersensitivity 
as part of chronic cough and cough hypersensitivity 
syndrome.
251.	Vertigan, A. E., Kapela, S. M., Kearney, E. K.  
& Gibson, P. G. Laryngeal dysfunction in cough 
hypersensitivity syndrome: a cross-​sectional 
observational study. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. Pract.  
6, 2087–2095 (2018).
252.	Bucca, C. B. et al. Chronic cough and irritable larynx. 
J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 127, 412–419 (2011).
253.	Ryan, N. M. & Gibson, P. G. Characterization of 
laryngeal dysfunction in chronic persistent cough. 
Laryngoscope 119, 640–645 (2009).
254.	Hull, J. H., Backer, V., Gibson, P. G. & Fowler, S. J. 
Laryngeal dysfunction: assessment and management 
for the clinician. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 194, 
1062–1072 (2016).
255.	Chamberlain, S., Birring, S. S. & Garrod, R. 
Nonpharmacological interventions for refractory 
chronic cough patients: systematic review. Lung 192, 
75–85 (2014).
Author contributions
Introduction (S.B.M. and K.F.C.), Epidemiology (W.J.-​S., 
A.B.C. and K.L.), Mechanisms/pathophysiology (S.B.M., B.J.C. 
and J.A.S.), Diagnosis, screening and prevention (K.F.C., L.M., 
A.B.C. and S.S.B.), Management (K.F.C. and J.A.S.), Quality 
of life (S.S.B. and A.B.C.), Outlook (S.B.M.).
Competing interests
K.F.C. has received honoraria for participating on Advisory 
Board meetings of GSK, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Merck, 
Nocion, Shionogi and Reckitt Benckiser and on the Scientific 
Advisory Board of the Clean Breathing Institute supported by 
GSK Health Care Consumer Products. He has also been remu-
nerated for speaking engagements by AstraZeneca, Novartis 
and Merck. L.M. reports honoraria from Chiesi, GSK, Merck, 
NeRRe Therapeutics, and Shionogi Inc.; grant support from 
Merck; and other support from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Chiesi and Reckitt Benckiser. W.-​J.S. declares 
grants from Merck and AstraZeneca, consulting fees from 
Merck, AstraZeneca, Shionogi and GSK, and lecture fees 
from Merck, AstraZeneca, GSK and Novartis. A.B.C. reports 
fees to her institution as IDMC Member of an unlicensed vac-
cine (GSK), an unlicensed molecule for chronic cough (Merck), 
IDMC Member of an unlicensed monoclonal antibody 
(AstraZeneca) and personal fees from being an author of two 
Up-​to-​date chapters. K.L. has received honoraria from 
AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Circassia, Daiichi Sankyo (China), GSK, 
Merck, Shionogi Inc. and Novartis; grant and other support from 
AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Circassia, Daiichi Sankyo (China), GSK 
and Merck. B.J.C. has received honoraria from Merck, 
GSK, Nocion, Axalbion, Menlo and Attenua, and grant sup-
port from Site One and Merck. S.S.B. reports honoraria from 
Merck, Bellus Health, Bayer, Shionogi, NeRRe, Menlo, 
Boehringer Ingelheim and Reckitt Benckiser. J.A.S. is an 
inventor on a patent describing methods for detecting cough 
from sound recordings, licensed to Vitalograph Ltd. J.A.S. has 
received funding for consultancy and research funds from 
Afferent Pharmaceuticals, Merck Inc., Bayer, Bellus, GSK, 
Xention Ltd, Ario Pharma Ltd, Glenmark, Almirall, 
AstraZeneca, Axalbion, Patara, Verona Pharma, NeRRe 
Pharmaceuticals, Menlo Pharmaceuticals and Attenua Inc. 
S.B.M. declares honoraria from Merck, NeRRe Therapeutics, 
Reckitt Benckiser and Bellus Health and grant support from 
Merck and Bellus Health. None of the disclosed entities 
above had any involvement in the conceptualization, design, 
data collection, analysis, decision to publish or preparation of 
the manuscript.
Peer review information
Nature Reviews Disease Primers thanks Jonathan Abram 
Bernstein, Lu-​Yuan Lee, Anne Vertigan and the other, anony-
mous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of 
this work.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Supplementary information
The online version contains supplementary material available 
at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-022-00370-​w.
 
© Springer Nature Limited 2022
	
 21
NATURE REVIEWS | DiSEASE PRimERS | Article citation ID:            (2022) 8:45 
Primer
0123456789();: 
