SHORT COMMUNICATION
Cough suppression disorders spectrum
Jerome M. Reich*
Earl A Chiles Research Institute, 5251 NE Glisan, Bldg A, Portland, OR 97213-2967, United States
Received 9 October 2013; accepted 4 January 2014
Available online 14 January 2014
KEYWORDS
Cough suppression;
Atalectasis;
Bronchiectasis;
Lady Windermere
Syndrome
Summary
Volitional cough suppression, identiﬁed exclusively in females, is an unusual causal mechanism
for instances of lobar atalectasis and bronchiectasis. It is a postulated mechanism for the gen-
esis of Lady Windermere Syndrome.
ª 2014 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
Introduction
Cough. A convulsion of the lung vellicated by some
sharp serosity.
Samuel Johnson. Dictionary, 1755.
The superaddition of cough to mucociliary clearance is
critically important in preserving pulmonary sterility and
ventilation. Volitional cough suppression (VCS) as a patho-
genetic pathway for a variety of pulmonary disorders is
infrequently encountered. It may be more common than is
currently recognized.
Cough suppression disorders
Harris appears to be the ﬁrst person to assign responsibility
to VCS for instances of pulmonary disease. He reported a
series of ﬁve otherwise healthy females, ages 8e66, with
recurring pulmonary atalectasis, each of whom acknowl-
edged VCS. Bronchoscopy revealed inspissated sputum at
proximal levels. Further episodes were averted by author’s
admonition to cough freely [1].
Wells et al. characterized the syndrome of bronchiec-
tasis attributable to VCS under the rubric, “atussis nerv-
osa”, alluding to the gender and psychological parallels
with anorexia nervosa. The authors described four adoles-
cent girls with chronic purulent sputum production who
were free of evident predisposing host defense defects.
Bronchiectasis was evident on CT in two. Bronchoscopy,
undertaken in three, showed copious secretions in the
central airways; in two, CT showed a tracheal air/ﬂuid
level.
Tracheobronchial
clearance,
assessed
in
three,
showed a hold-up of particles in the trachea. Cough re-
sponses to inhaled capsaicin were normal in all. Flow vol-
ume curves showed poor cooperation, extremely low
reproducibility and, in two, a pronounced expiratory
ﬂutter. The authors concluded that there was no organic
cause for their inability to expectorate secretions, noting
that their illnesses conferred (unspeciﬁed) psychiatric gain
[2].
Marsh et al. reported a similar disorder in three girls,
each of whom demonstrated a tracheal air/ﬂuid level.
* Earl A Chiles Research Institute, Thoracic Oncology Section,
7400 SW Barnes Rd. A242, Portland, OR 97225-7007, United States.
Tel.: þ1 503 292 6027; fax: þ1 503 296 4878.
E-mail address: Reichje@isp.com.
0954-6111/$ - see front matter ª 2014 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2014.01.001
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/rmed
Respiratory Medicine (2014) 108, 413e415
Age of onset of symptoms was 18-months, 3-years and <13-
years in one. Bronchoscopy showed copious tracheal and
proximal bronchial secretions in each; bronchiectasis was
evident on CT in two. The authors found no evidence of
cystic ﬁbrosis or an underlying ciliary, immunological or
neurological deﬁcit, and concluded that VCS of undeter-
mined cause was the likely source of the syndrome [3].
They cited “rattling” breathing as a clinical feature, and
concluded, “Where there is a suspicion of cough suppres-
sion, chest CT scan showing air/ﬂuid levels in the main
airways or bronchoscopy showing markedly excessive upper
airway and tracheal secretions are highly suggestive of the
diagnosis”.
All 12 individuals comprising these three case series
were female ðPZ1=212Z0:00024Þ.
Reich
and
Johnson
reported
on
29
non-
immunocompromised individuals with pulmonary disease
due to Mycobacterium avium complex in a case series
originating in a non-referral setting [4]. Six (one-ﬁfth)
exhibited a distinctive, anomalous clinical pattern: disease
limited to the lingula or middle lobe, exclusively in elderly
females free of a predisposing pulmonary disorder. The
authors hypothesized that VCS sequentially led to: selec-
tive retention of secretions in regions most dependent on
cough for clearance due to their limited collateral venti-
lation and their lengthy, narrow and dependent subserving
bronchi
/
low
grade
suppuration
/
localized
bronchiectasis / colonization by M. avium complex. To
convey the fastidiousness resulting in VCS, they suggested
the appellation, Lady Windermere Syndrome [5] (LWS) after
the title role character in a 19th century British play. In
support
of
VCS
as
a
pathogenetic
mechanism,
they
instanced two cases with acknowledged VCS, both in fe-
males, one with predominantly bibasal tuberculosis and a
second with bilobar atalectasis [5]. The author (JR, unre-
ported case) identiﬁed a young female nurse with cavitary
pulmonary tuberculosis who developed ileocaecal tuber-
culosis, inferring that this complication was a consequence
of swallowing respiratory secretions to suppress her cough.
Discussion
That VCS is the underlying pathogenetic mechanism of
pulmonary disorders in the cases reported by Harris, Wells
and Marsh et al. appears indisputable. The coinage “atussis
nervosa” conveys the idea that, like inferring appetite
suppression in the genesis of anorexia nervosa, one can
infer VCS from ineffective or absent cough in neuro-
lomuscularly unimpaired individuals exhibiting copious,
proximal tracheobronchial secretions.
In contrast, the pathogenesis of LWS is disputed. Pom-
erantz et al. [6] reported on the resection of the right
middle lobe and/or lingula in 13 persons, all females, for
treatment of isolated M. avium disease. The authors
emphasized phenotypic features frequently associated with
this disorder e asthenic body habitus, straight back, and
pectus deformity e and emphasized the frequent obser-
vation of elongation the lingula and the intact nature of the
adjacent ﬁssures (signaling diminished collateral ventila-
tion). Iseman et al. [7] emphasized the existence of
thoracic abnormalities e pectus excavatum, scoliosis,
straight back syndrome e as predisposing features. On the
basis of this commonly encountered phenotype and a
frequent association with mitral valve prolapse, Iseman
hypothesized
that
LWS
reﬂected
a
connective
tissue
disorder.
Kim et al. undertook a systematic evaluation of poten-
tial predisposing features in 63 subjects with severe, re-
fractory,
non-tuberculous
mycobacterial
pulmonary
diseases [8]. Morphotype, immunophenotype, and cystic
ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) ge-
notype characterization failed to account for the constel-
lation of deﬁning features of LWS e female exclusivity,
advanced age at onset, absence of predisposing pulmonary
disease, distinctive restricted disease localization, and M.
avium susceptibility.
The inference that cough suppression was the prime
mechanism is supported by reports of elderly women with
LWS who acknowledged lifelong VCS [9,10]. Bronchiectasis
conﬁned to the right middle lobe preceded the diagnosis of
M. avium disease by 3-years in the ﬁrst case [9]. The
complaint of coughing in advanced cases (possibly over-
coming the ability to suppress it) does not exclude VCS in its
genesis; among individuals unaccustomed to coughing, its
presence may be excessively disturbing. (Notably, cigarette
smokers rarely complain of cough.) These alternative ex-
planations are not mutually exclusive: the frequently
encountered phenotypic and anatomic features would be
expected to potentiate the effect of VCS in causing stasis,
and the effect of pectus excavatum in compressing and
elongating the lingula would appear to be sufﬁcient in itself
to generate the syndrome.
In summary, VCS appears responsible for a variety of
uncommonly encountered respiratory disorders. Its female
exclusivity has not been accounted for. “Rattling” breath-
ing and absence of a percussive note of glottal decom-
pression initiating the cough are useful clinical indicators of
VCS. Demonstration of a tracheal air/ﬂuid level on CT,
absent an accountable neuromuscular disorder, furnishes
conﬁrmation. The consequences of VCS can often be
reversed or ameliorated by encouraging subjects to cough
vigorously.
Conﬂict of interest
None.
References
[1] Harris MS. Pulmonary atalectasis due to voluntary suppression
of cough. Dis Chest 1961;39:539e41.
[2] Wells A, Rahman A, Woodhead M, Hansell D, Pfeffer J,
Wilson R, Cole P. The clinical features of voluntary cough
suppression associated with chronic pulmonary suppuration
(atussis nervosa). A controlled evaluation. Am Rev Respir Dis
1993;147:A461.
[3] Marsh R, Gupta A, Gilchrist FJ, et al. The trachea with an air-
ﬂuid level: a rare and bizarre radiological sign. Pediatr Pul-
monol 2012;47:826e30.
[4] Reich JM, Johnson RE. Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare
pulmonary disease: incidence, treatment, and outcomes in a
community setting. Am Rev Respir Dis 1991;143:1381e5.
414
J.M. Reich
[5] Reich JM, Johnson RE. Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare
disease presenting as an isolated middle lobe or lingular
pattern: Lady Windermere Syndrome. Chest 1992;101:1605e9.
[6] Pomerantz M, Denton JR, Huitt GA, Brown JM, Powell LA,
Iseman MD. Resection of the right middle lobe and lingula for
mycobacterial infection. Ann Thorac Surg 1996;62:990e3.
[7] Iseman MD, Buschman DL, Ackerson LM. Pectus excavatum and
scoliosis: thoracic abnormalities associated with pulmonary
disease caused by Mycobacterium avium complex. Am Rev
Respir Dis 1991;144:914e6.
[8] Kim RD, Greenberg DE, Ehrmantraut ME, et al. Pulmonary
nontuberculous mycobacterial disease: prospective study of a
distinct preexisting syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2008;
178:1066e74.
[9] Dhillon SS, Watanakunakorn C. Lady Windermere Syndrome:
middle lobe bronchiectasis and mycobacterium avium com-
plex infection due to voluntary cough suppression. Clin Infect
Dis 2000;30:572e5.
[10] Byrd Jr R, Payne JL, Roy TM. Lingular and middle lobe in-
ﬁltrates in an elderly woman. Chest 1995;108:1156e7.
Suppressed cough
415
