Telepulmonology: Effect on quality and
efﬁciency of care
Leonie Thijssing a,b,*, Job P. van der Heijden b,
Niels H. Chavannes c, Christian F. Melissant d,
Monique W.M. Jaspers a, Leonard Witkamp b
a Center of Human Factors Engineering of Health Information Technology HITlab, Department of
Medical Informatics, Academic Medical Center-University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
b KSYOS Health Management Research, Amstelveen, The Netherlands
c Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands
d Department of Pulmonology, Spaarne Hospital, Hoofddorp, The Netherlands
Received 24 April 2013; accepted 23 October 2013
Available online 31 October 2013
KEYWORDS
Telemedicine;
Pulmonary medicine;
Quality improvement;
Efﬁciency
Summary
Background: Interpreting spirometry results has proven challenging in primary care practice,
among others potentially leading to under- and misdiagnosis of COPD. In telepulmonology a
general practitioner (GP) digitally consults a pulmonologist to support the interpretation of
spirometry results. This study assessed the effect of telepulmonology on quality and efﬁciency
of care.
Methods: Quality of care was measured by ﬁve indicators, among others the percentage of Tel-
ePulmonology Consultations (TPCs) sent by GPs for advice, percentage of those TPCs resulting
in a physical referral, and educational effect of telepulmonology as experienced by GPs. Efﬁ-
ciency was deﬁned as the percentage of prevented unnecessary physical referrals of patients
to the pulmonologist.
Results: Between April 2009 and November 2012 1.958 TPCs were sent by 158 GPs to 32 pul-
monologists. Sixty-nine percent of the TPCs were sent for advice. Based on the advice of
the pulmonologist 18% of these TPCs led to a physical referral of patients who would not
have been referred without telepulmonology. Thirty-one percent of the TPCs were intended
to prevent a physical referral, 68% of these actually prevented a physical referral to a pulmo-
nologist.
Abbreviation list: GP, General Practitioner; TPC, TelePulmonology Consultation; COPD, Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.
* Corresponding author. Department of Medical Informatics, AcademicMedicalCenter, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Tel.:
þ312 5666204.
E-mail address: l.thijssing@amc.uva.nl (L. Thijssing).
0954-6111/$ - see front matter ª 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2013.10.017
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/rmed
Respiratory Medicine (2014) 108, 314e318
Conclusion: The results show telepulmonology can contribute to quality of care by supporting
GPs and can additionally prevent unnecessary physical referrals.
ª 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Introduction
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is a chronic
lung disorder characterized by a not fully reversible airﬂow
limitation that is usually progressive [1] and constitutes the
fourth leading cause of death worldwide [2]. In the
Netherlands the reported prevalence of diagnosed COPD is
1.8% in men and 1.6% in women [3]. However, a recent
study in the Netherlands found a prevalence of COPD
almost as high as 25% in a random sample of a population
aged over 40 years [4]. The actual prevalence of COPD is
higher than the reported prevalence due to the fact that
COPD is often under- and misdiagnosed [5e7].
One of the reasons for the under- and misdiagnosis of
COPD is that primary healthcare workers often have difﬁ-
culty interpreting spirometry results [5,6]. Spirometry is a
lung function test, resulting in a graph and lung function
parameters required to diagnose COPD [8]. Spirometry is
also used to detect and monitor other lung conditions such
as asthma. White et al. identiﬁed clinically signiﬁcant
disagreements between general practitioners (GPs) and
pulmonologists in the interpretation of spirometry graphs
and
consequent
diagnosis
in
49
out
of
168
tests
(Kappa Z 0.39) and of quality of the spirometry test in 67
out of 212 tests (Kappa Z 0.07) [9]. The main reason for
disagreement on diagnosis was that COPD was not diag-
nosed by GPs, while according to international criteria the
test results indicated COPD. A study of Yawn et al. likewise
found disagreements between GPs and pulmonologists on
the interpretation of spirometry results in 88 out of 368
tests (24%) [10]. Most common reasons for disagreement in
this study were overreporting of airﬂow obstruction in
patients with normal spirometry results by GPs, inter-
preting restrictive patterns in people with poor effort and
diagnosing COPD in absence of spirometry results indi-
cating COPD. Validity of spirometric testing in the general
practice was studied by Schermer et al. They concluded
that with sufﬁcient training of the practice staff, per-
forming of spirometric tests seemed justiﬁable [11].
However, practice staff is not always sufﬁciently trained in
performing spirometric tests and interpretation remains
difﬁcult. Thus, as concluded by Poels et al., there is a need
for ongoing support for spirometry interpretation among
GPs [12].
Telepulmonology is an implementation of telemedicine
that could support general practitioners in interpreting
spirometry results. In telepulmonology a GP digitally con-
sults a pulmonologist to gain support in diagnosing patients
or to gain treatment advice concerning all kinds of lung
conditions. There are two types of telepulmonology: store-
and-forward (time and place independent) and real-time
telepulmonology (only place independent). Until now few
studies have been published that assessed the effect of
telepulmonology on quality and efﬁciency of care. Real-
time telepulmonology, using videoconferencing technology,
has proven effective in some studies [13,14]. In one study
40 patients were seen by pulmonologists both face-to-face
and via telepulmonology. For each condition, ﬁndings of the
pulmonologists on the patient’s medical history, physical
examination, diagnostic impression and evaluation and
treatment plan were reported and later on compared by
two
independent
pulmonologists.
Agreement
between
ﬁndings in both settings was rated on a scale of 1e4 with 1
representing complete agreement and 4 representing no
agreement. Average agreement scores ranged from 1.32 to
1.81 [13]. In another study the use of real-time tele-
pulmonology at a local clinic prevented a physical referral
for 92% of the patients. Thus, besides supporting GPs in
diagnosing patients through consultation of a pulmonolo-
gist, telepulmonology may also be used to prevent physical
referrals of patients to the pulmonologist.
In the Italian Alliance study the feasibility of store-and-
forward telepulmonology via telephone lines was assessed.
Telepulmonology was found to be well accepted and easily
performed by a large number of GPs (n Z 937) [15]. Tele-
pulmonology enabled pulmonologists to provide clinical
information useful to GPs for decision making on diagnosis
and clinical management of patients [16]. Another study
concluded that the web-based remote support on inter-
pretation of, and comment on the quality of, the spirom-
etry results by pulmonologists to GPs generated a sustained
increase in the quality of spirometry [17]. According to the
participating GPs, pulmonologists’ advices helped them to
improve their performance in conducting and interpreting
spirometry tests. Thus, previous studies showed tele-
pulmonology can support GPs in performing and interpret-
ing spirometry tests. However, to our knowledge no
previous study assessed the effect of store-and-forward
telepulmonology implemented in daily general practice on
different aspects of quality of care and on the number of
prevented physical referrals.
This study therefore focuses on the effect of store-and-
forward telepulmonology implemented in daily practices of
Dutch GPs, with regard to the quality of care and the
number of prevented unnecessary physical referrals.
Materials and methods
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
All GPs registered in the Netherlands and in possession of a
spirometer that could be linked to a computer, were
eligible to start using telepulmonology. Each GP who star-
ted using the KSYOS TeleConsultation System (KSYOS Tele-
Medical Centre, Amstelveen, The Netherlands)for the ﬁrst
time received on-site training in the use of the system of
approximately 1 h. GPs already working with the system
Telepulmonology: Effect on quality and efﬁciency of care
315
received a less extensive training. Additionally they could
contact a dedicated helpdesk. GPs who participated in this
study decided whom of their patients they considered
suitable for a telepulmonology consult (TPC). They were
not advised on the type of conditions for which to use tel-
epulmonology, except that patients demanding urgent care
were not suitable for telepulmonology.
Teleconsultation system
All TPCs were sent between a GP and a pulmonologist via
the hypertext transfer protocol secured, web-based tele-
consultation system. Users could access the system through
a combination of username and password, by using the
Dutch Unique Healthcare Identiﬁcation card, or through a
Single-Sign-On solution integrated in the GP information
systems. Answers given by the pulmonologist were auto-
matically and securely sent to the GP information system.
The teleconsultation system also incorporated other tele-
medicine
services
such
as
teledermatology,
tele-
ophthalmology and telecardiology.
The telepulmonology consultation process
GPs logged in to the web-based teleconsultation system,
after which they ﬁlled in mandatory patient information.
Subsequently they uploaded up to four PDF’s of the pa-
tient’s spirometry results, ﬁlled in the patient’s medical
history, added relevant medication of the patient and
asked the pulmonologist for advice. Additionally more
detailed information on the patient’s medical history could
be added by the GP. The GP then sent the TPC to the local
pulmonologist, who had to answer the TPC within two
working days. Pulmonologists were reminded by e-mail and
consequently by phone if they exceeded these two working
days. The pulmonologist answered the TPC with regard to
description of the ﬁndings, additional questions, diagnostic
considerations and advice. In addition to this, the pulmo-
nologist answered two mandatory questions: ‘Diagnosis
COPD?’ (Answer categories: Yes, No, Unsure) and ‘Is a visit
to the specialist required?’ (Answer categories: Yes, No,
Inapplicable). After the GP had received the answer, the GP
could start one more communication round with the pul-
monologist. This round could be used by the GP to provide
other (patient) information needed by the pulmonologist or
to ask for clariﬁcation of the pulmonologist’s answer when
needed.
Data collection
All data were gathered from routine clinical practice. Tel-
epulmonology consults sent via the teleconsultation system
were included in this study. Patients gave oral informed
consent for the telepulmonology consultation. On sending
and closing a TPC a GP was asked a number of mandatory
questions that were used to measure the effect of tele-
pulmonology on quality and on the number of prevented
physical referrals. Questions asked to GPs are shown in
Fig. 1. Timestamps of TPCs sent were saved to derive the
mean response time of the pulmonologists.
Quality of care
Five indicators were used to measure quality of care. The
percentage of TPCs sent by GPs for which advice of a pul-
monologist was requested was the ﬁrst indicator. The second
indicator was the percentage of patients physically referred
by the GP to the pulmonologist, who would not have been
referred without telepulmonology. This equaled the per-
centage of TPCs where question 1 (Q1) was answered with
‘No’ and question 2 (Q2) with ‘Yes’. Question 3 (Q3) could be
answered with the following three answers ‘No’, ’Slightly’,
’Yes’. The last two answers were considered an educational
effect experienced by the GP which was the third indicator.
The fourth indicator was the percentage of TPCs in which the
GP was helped with the pulmonologist’s response (question 4
(Q4) answered with ‘Slightly’ or ‘Yes’). The mean response
time in working hours of the pulmonologists was the last in-
dicator. Hours between 8.30 am and 5.30 pm on weekdays
were counted as working hours.
Efﬁciency of care
Efﬁciency of care was expressed as the percentage of
prevented physical referrals. The percentage of prevented
unnecessary physical referrals in the group of patients that
would
have
been
physically
referred
without
tele-
pulmonology equaled the percentage of TPCs where Q1
‘Without
telepulmonology,
would
you
have
physically
referred this patient?’ was answered with ‘Yes’ and Q2 ‘Do
you refer this patient physically?’ was answered with ‘No’.
The overall percentage of prevented physical referrals
was calculated using Formula (1):
Figure 1
Questions asked to the GP during the TP process.
1 
Total number of patients physically referred
Total number of patients that would have been referred without TP100%
ð1Þ
316
L. Thijssing et al.
The number of TPCs where Q1 was answered with ‘Yes’
was considered the total number of patients that would
have been referred without telepulmonology. The total
number of patients physically referred was deﬁned as the
number of TPCs where the answer to Q2 was ‘Yes’.
The McNemar test was used to test whether the differ-
ence between the number of patients physically referred
using
telepulmonology
signiﬁcantly
differed
from
the
number
of
patients
physically
referred
without
tele-
pulmonology. Statistical analyses were performed using the
Statistical Package for Social Sciences SPSS (version 19).
Results
In total 1.958 TPCs of 1.828 patients were sent by 158 GPs
and answered by 32 pulmonologists between April 2009 and
November 2012. The mean age of the patients for whom a
TPC was sent was 52.4 years. The youngest patient for
whom a TPC was sent was 6 years; the oldest patient was 91
years. Forty-seven percent (n Z 917) of the patients were
male. Twenty-three percent (n Z 284) of the patients were
diagnosed with COPD. The pulmonologist answered ‘Un-
sure’ to the question ’Diagnosis COPD?’ in 16% (n Z 190)
and with ‘No’ in 61% (n Z 750) of the cases. In 92.8% of the
cases the pulmonologist’s advice, concerning physically
referring or not physically referring the patient, was fol-
lowed by the GP. Answers to the questions asked to the GP
were not available for approximately 25% of the TPCs, the
number of answers available varied per question.
Quality of care
Sixty-nine percent (n Z 939) of the teleconsultations were
sent to gain advice, 18% (n Z 172) of these tele-
consultations eventually lead to a physical referral (Fig. 2).
Seventy-ﬁve percent (n Z 1.062) answered ‘Yes’ to the
question
‘Did
you
learn
from
the
pulmonologist’s
response?’, 17% (n Z 245) answered ‘Slightly’ and 8%
(n Z 120) answered ‘No’. Therefore overall 92% of the GPs
indicated they learned from the pulmonologist’s response.
The question ‘Are you and your patient helped with the
pulmonologist’s response?’ was answered with ‘Yes’ in 67%
(n Z 947) of the TPCs, with ‘Slightly’ in 29% (n Z 417) of
the cases and with ‘No’ in 4% (n Z 54) of the cases. Thus, in
96% of the TPCs the GP or the patient was helped with the
answer of the pulmonologist. Pulmonologists answered the
TPCs on average after 18.2 working hours (n Z 1212).
Efﬁciency of care
Thirty-one percent (n Z 420) of the teleconsultations were
intended to prevent a physical referral, 68% (n Z 285) of
these
teleconsultations
actually
prevented
a
physical
referral. Without telepulmonology 420 patients would have
been referred to the pulmonologist. With the imple-
mentation of telepulmonology this number decreased to
307 patients. The overall percentage of prevented physical
referrals thus was 27%.
The asymptotic signiﬁcance of the McNemar test for the
difference in physical referrals with and without tele-
pulmonology was 0.000 and Chi-square was 27.880, thus the
difference was signiﬁcant.
Discussion
Telepulmonology facilitates the support of local pulmo-
nologists to GPs in diagnosing patients, making decisions
about
their
treatmentand
deciding
whether
physical
referral of patients might be required. The aim of the study
was to identify the effect of telepulmonology on quality
and efﬁciency of care. Results show that telepulmonology
applied after patient selection by the GP triages additional
patients to the pulmonologist and reduces physical re-
ferrals in others, while the GPs learn during the process.
Telepulmonology therefore helps to ensure that GPs refer
the right patients to the pulmonologist.
In this study, 18% of the patients who would normally not
have been physically referred by a GP, now were physically
referred after TPC on advice of the pulmonologist. This is
likely to improve quality of care for these patients. Addi-
tionally
telepulmonology
supports
GPs
in
interpreting
spirometry results, diagnosing patients and making treat-
ment decisions. GPs indicated they learned from the TPC in
over 90% of the cases, while an even higher percentage said
they or their patients felt aided by the answer of the pul-
monologist. Furthermore, the high number of TPCs sent by
GPs to ask for advice conﬁrms the ﬁndings of Poels et al.
that there is a need for ongoing support among GPs in
interpreting
spirometry
results
[12].
Without
tele-
pulmonology, GPs would not have had the support of the
pulmonologist, while this seems to aid in preventing under-
and misdiagnosis of COPD.
Within the group of TPCs sent by GPs with the aim to
prevent a physical referral, 68% actually prevented a
physical referral. Due to additional physical referrals of
patients on advice of the pulmonologist, the overall decline
in physical referrals was 27%. In the study of Raza et al. 92%
of the patients did not need to be physically referred after
telepulmonology consultation [14]. However, in this study it
was not known whether the patients would have been
physically referred without telepulmonology. It is therefore
not clear how often telepulmonology actually prevented
physical
referrals
in
that
study.
Additionally
tele-
consultation did not take place at the GP’s practice, but at
a small rural hospital where subspecialty care was not
Figure 2
Physical referrals. Column 1 shows the number of
TPCs intended to prevent a physical referral, divided into TPCs
that indeed did not result in a physical referral and TPCs that
did not prevent a physical referral. Column 2 shows the number
of TPCs sent to ask for advice, divided into TPCs that did not
results in a physical referral and those that did.
Telepulmonology: Effect on quality and efﬁciency of care
317
available. In our study, telepulmonology thus increased the
efﬁciency of care substantially.
This study has some limitations. First, results are based
on answers given by the GPs. These might not always have
been objective. In addition, no follow-up data on patients
were collected. It is therefore not known whether patients
for whom GPs indicated they were not physically referred
to a pulmonologist, did indeed not visit a pulmonologist.
The same argument holds, but vice versa, for patients for
whom GPs indicated they were physically referred. Another
limitation is that questions were only posed to the GP when
a TPC was actively closed by the GP. Therefore answers of
GPs were not available for approximately 25% of the TPCs.
This may have biased the results as well. The cost-
effectiveness of the implementation of telepulmonology
was not assessed, this could be studied in future research.
However, the strength of the study is that it identiﬁed ef-
fects of telepulmonology implemented in daily general
practice on quality and efﬁciency of care. To our knowl-
edge these two aspects of telepulmonology have not been
reported earlier. Another strength is that telepulmonology
was implemented in real life daily general practice, not in a
simulated research setting.
Conclusion
Telepulmonology provides a way to support the GPs in
interpreting spirometry results, diagnosing patients and
making decisions on the treatment of patients. GPs using
telepulmonology experience an educational effect and they
or their patients feel aided by the answer of the pulmo-
nologist. Telepulmonology also ensures GPs physically refer
the right patients to the pulmonologists. Additionally the
results show that telepulmonology, by improving the
communication between GP and pulmonologist, prevents
unnecessary physical referrals. Thus, telepulmonology can
contribute to a higher quality of care for COPD patients in a
more efﬁcient way.
Conﬂict of interest statement
L. Thijssing and J.P. van der Heijden are employed by
KSYOS Health Management Research, and L. Witkamp is the
Director of KSYOS Health Management Research. The
remaining authors state no conﬂicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
L. Thijssing contributed to the study design, data collec-
tion, data analysis and interpretation and writing of the
manuscript.
J.P. van der Heijden contributed to the study design,
data collection, data analysis, critical review of the
manuscript and approval of the ﬁnal draft.
N.H. Chavannes contributed to the study design, critical
review of the manuscript and approval of the ﬁnal draft.
C.F. Melissant contributed to the study design, critical
review of the manuscript and approval of the ﬁnal draft.
M.W.M. Jaspers contributed to the study design, critical
review of the manuscript and approval of the ﬁnal draft.
L.W. Witkamp contributed to the study design, critical
review of the manuscript and approval of the ﬁnal draft.
References
[1] Smeele IJM, Van Weel C, Van Schayck CP, et al. NHG-stand-
aard COPD. Huisarts Wet 2007;50(8):362e79.
[2] World
Health
Organization.
http://www.who.int/
mediacentre/factsheets/fs310/en/ Date last updated: June
2011. Date last accessed: October 30 2012.
[3] NationaalKompas.
http://www.nationaalkompas.nl/
gezondheid-en-ziekte/ziekten-en-aandoeningen/
ademhalingswegen/copd/cijfers-copd-prevalentie-
incidentie-en-sterfte-uit-de-vtv-2010/.
Date
last
updated:
September 27 2012. Date last accessed: October 30 2012.
[4] Vanﬂeteren LEGW, Franssen FME, Wesseling G, Wouters EFM.
The prevalence of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in
Maastricht, The Netherlands. Respir Med 2012;106:871e4.
[5] Sandelowsky
H,
Sta¨llberg
B,
Nager
A,
Hasselstro¨m
J.
The prevalence of undiagnosed chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease in a primary care population with respiratory
tract infections e a case ﬁnding study. BMC Fam Pract 2011;
12:122.
[6] Takahashi T, Ichinose M, Inoue H, Shirato K, Hattori T,
Takishima T. Underdiagnosis and under treatment of COPD in
primary care settings. Respirology 2003;8:504e8.
[7] Bellamy D, Smith J. Role of primary care in early diagnosis and
effective management of COPD. Int J Clin Pract 2007;61(8):
1380e9.
[8] Rabe KF, Hurd S, Anzueto A, et al. Global strategy for the
diagnosis, management, and prevention of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: GOLD executive summary. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 2007;176:532e55.
[9] White P, Wong W, Fleming T, Gray B. Primary care spirometry:
test quality and the feasibility and usefulness of specialist
reporting. Br J Gen Pract 2007:701e5.
[10] Yawn BP, Enright PL, Lemanske RF, et al. Spirometry can be
done in family physicians’ ofﬁces and alters clinical de-
cisions in management of asthma and COPD. Chest 2007;
132:1162e8.
[11] Schermer TR, Jacobs JE, Chavannes NH, et al. Validity of
spirometric testing in a general practice population of pa-
tients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Thorax 2003;58:861e86.
[12] Poels PJP, Schermer TRJ, Akkermans RP, et al. General prac-
titioners’ needs for ongoing support for the interpretation of
spirometry tests. Eur J Gen Pract 2007;13:16e9.
[13] Pacht ER, Turner JW, Gailiun M, Violi LAD, Ralston D,
Mehkjian HS, St. John RC. Effectiveness of telemedicine in the
outpatient pulmonary clinic. Telemed J 1998;4(4):287e92.
[14] Raza T, Joshi M, Schapira RM, Agha Z. Pulmonary telemedicine
e a model to access the subspecialist services in underserved
rural areas. Int J Med Inform 2009;78:53e9.
[15] Bonavia M, Averame G, Canonica W, et al. Feasibility and
validation of telespirometry in general practice: the Italian
“Alliance” study. Respir Med 2009;103:1732e7.
[16] Averame G, Bonavia M, Ferri P, et al. Ofﬁce spirometry can
improve the diagnosis of obstructive airway disease in primary
care setting. Respir Med 2009;103:866e72.
[17] Burgos F, Disdier C, Lopez de Santamaria E, et al. Telemedi-
cine enhances quality of forced spirometry in primary care.
Eur Respir J 2012;39(6):1313e8.
318
L. Thijssing et al.
